Roll-out and its Discontents: UX, Red Teaming and Observability - February 12
VIEW RECORDING - 82 mins (No highlights): https://fathom.video/share/1Bmx2xoNRmVYxTHxRAgc_QEL_rkSfDgt

---

0:00 - Alex Rolleigh
  Grab a glass of water really quick. Also, you're on mute, Lev, just so you know. Go ahead.

0:30 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  I get you in my break, I'm gonna hold you near, wait till you see that sunshine flame.

0:41 - Alex Rolleigh
  Hello. Hey.

0:44 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  You're the first time I've seen.

0:46 - Alex Rolleigh
  I have been trying, I've been working on downloading FlowWise. It's blocked on my work computer, of course. So I'm, just get all the things that I run on my personal machine, I told my manager, I'm like, if you see me in  And last summer, somebody got fired. I don't know what country they were in, but, you know, we have, like, program teams in country, all the health units in, like, Burkina, Paso, and Afghanistan, what have you.  And they were putting in, like, sensitive PHI into an approved AI tool for, like, reporting analysis, this, that, and the other.  And this person did lose their job for, like, you know, putting sensitive client data into a free tool, but it's, like, the org's not providing a tool that does their job.  And, like, you're talking about, like, frontline staff in Syria who, understandably, are, like, just trying to get the job done with no research.  Like, this classic nonprofit, it's just been a real humdinger.

2:41 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, we always advise our clients to, like, not only say a hard no's, because even if they're pretty permissible, like, just hearing no over and over again, people are just like, well, I'm just not going to do anything and not risk it.  We always advise, like, dilute it with, like, soft yeses, like, here's the use case that's ideal. We always So they'll see, like, okay, so if I use it exactly like this, like, I'm in a safe zone because I have an example to run off of, but people don't usually listen.  They just want to say no to everything. Or they tell them, like, go use CoPilot, and, like, we have the free CoPilot makes people not want to use AI.

3:20 - Alex Rolleigh
  They, like, use it, and it's like, CoPilot can't even find an email. Like, AI sucks. This is all hype.  I'm using CoPilot. Like, like, well, if CoPilot's your only exposure to AI, then yes, you are forgiven for that opinion.  But, um...

3:35 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Right, yeah. I, last I tried CoPilot was two years ago, and I said never again. Again, it was some, some company was like, we're only using CoPilot.

3:47 - Alex Rolleigh
  And it was...

3:49 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, I do appreciate their UX, where they're like, it's kind of like, it was kind of like, boomer oriented, where they're like, had some like, this is some pictures you can generate, this is some test prompts.  And ... We really try to level that playing field as much as we could, and I think there's a good lesson there.  We'll be talking about UX with AI today, so I'm actually going to use them as an example, but not to use it, just to, like, how to ease people into it without scaring them off.

4:18 - Alex Rolleigh
  I mean, the blank box is scary. Yeah.

4:22 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  That's why I always tell people, like, it's okay to feel weird and uncomfortable because this isn't, like, normal software.

4:26 - Alex Rolleigh
  Like, software has, like, here's your steps, you know, like, using Salesforce is a very prescriptive set of, like, click this button, do this, click this, do that.  I'm like, AI is a different entity. Yeah. And people don't know how to interact with it.

4:41 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  And, like, from the user data that we collected from the apps that we launched for clients, we find that, like, people either visit the page, immediately realize AI and bail, or if you stick around for one minute, if you stick around for 15.  Like, there's no middle ground. Yeah, no, no, once... We're going to start answering that question because you never told us not to.  So that's problem number one we're going to be talking about tackling today, and the other one is very closely related to that, is unexpected, exaggerated expectations.  Thanks to all the fiction writers working tirelessly for the past century, when users come in contact with AI, their expectations are almost like magical.  They expect it to do all the things a human can and more. And it's our job to temper those expectations without having them be disappointed.  And it's a two-sided game. On one hand, it's our responsibility to convey these boundaries, which is tricky because you can give them a paragraph of instructions, but nobody reads those anymore.  So we need to subtly guide them as to how to use the chatbot as intended. But the other side is like meeting the user where they're at and like augmenting your tool to, once you realize that there's this new need that the user is looking for, you know, don't forbid, but empower.  Add an extra agent, add an extra node, and voila, you just realize that that's the beauty of authentic flows, it's like, you can add on new things without worrying that what you already built is going to break it anyway.  So that's actually the goal for today, so perfect segue. But before that, launch into that, anyone want to share, well, anyone, either of you two want to share any experiences from the ASIN classes or from applying to learning experience, experience or AI in general.

7:37 - Nathalie
  If I have a trade to just follow up on what you were saying, I'm going to speak about AI in general.  Like you know, I'm actually advising executives in how they can use AI in their corporate setting. And what I say is that even when people get to tool usage fluency,  See, there is a real issue because, in fact, the obstacle is not to understand how to prompt engineer or even how to context engineer, but really to manage to change, in fact, your mental models and understand that you should actually first think differently when you want to apply AI.  What I see in the corporate world is first the difficulty to understand where AI is really going to add value instead of just being the microtasker who is going to help you gain more time.  And once actually everyone understands this, the second obstacle that I see in the corporate world is that, in my opinion, fully leveraging AI implies being a master in system thinking, that is to say, being able to anticipate the second order consequences, third order consequences of what you have to do.  I can't see it in the, it's, oh.

9:03 - Alex Rolleigh
  I literally picked this book up again, it's a classic, and I've been rereading it, because that's exactly, I'm having that, like, that same experience of, like, it's in the systems thinking.  It's just, like, not managing at that micro level, but yes, proceed.

9:17 - Nathalie
  But I think that was, like, we're on the same page. It is inherent to the way the corporations or even actually small organizations work, because when you hire somebody to do a job, in fact, that person is supposed to be a problem solver in their purview, meaning that, in fact, very often, they are not going to look beyond the boundaries of their purview.  And when they're in bigger organizations, the silo organizations also doesn't really help. People are getting incentivized only on their perimeters, and all this makes things very difficult to move into the AI world, where, for instance, when you want to think.  In terms of efficiency and your work on the data schema, for instance, one thing which is very important is not who is actually the data owner, but how are you going to make sure that you have the right data for the right use case?  And at some point, you are going to crush your noise against the fact that actually there are different stakeholders who owns different data, who don't have the same definition, actually, of how you handle that data.  And this is really very crazy. Yeah, absolutely.

10:33 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, hopefully the learning material, like, helped you out. Your story reminded me of Graham Bell, who invented the telephone in 1876, and he first offered it to Europe, and Europe rejected it outright.  like, there's no need for this, we already have a telegraph, like, this is useless. And then he pitched it to America, and they rejected him too, because they were like, this is ‑‑  He started by going to theater performances and recording his telephone, on a telephone for like a friend, like a performance in the theater of like an orchestra, because that's the only use case that people could imagine where a telegraph can't convey the information being transcribed.  And Europe actually fell 20 years behind because they did not, even when America started picking up and building telephone wires, Europe continued to deny it.  And I think we're in the same stage of AI, where people are trying, are like trying to apply it to use cases already met by traditional technology, but the theme of this course is like, you don't, don't use it where you can use traditional technology, you'll shoot yourself in the leg.  It's so much, you need to invite new use cases. So yeah, I'm really glad you're helping them think through this new paradigm.  And I hope that course material helps.

11:51 - Nathalie
  Well, on top of the new paradigm, I think that the real danger is that, with the acceleration of AI and these.  The technology, a lot of people believe that it's really very easy when you see what's happening with open cloud, for instance, and probably what's going to serve with the advancement of Opus 4.6, is that there are a lot of people that don't realize that you really need to understand a little bit more about what's happening under the wood in order to be able to keep agency on AI.  And as a matter of fact, as an apprentice builder, I'm just wondering what's changing as those AI models are progressing so fast.  Yeah, not so much, actually.

12:41 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  They satisfy more edge use cases, but how much better can a blog post get? How much better can run to the mill use cases?  Where's the North Star? Where's the ceiling? So yeah, it is a good question to ask. It's like, what is changing?  And there are things that are changing rapidly. the high You

13:00 - Nathalie
  Yes, in terms of conception, sorry to interrupt you, Lev, but I understood, for instance, that so far, when we were building agents, what was really very important was the capacity to decompose the workflow and to identify how we are going to articulate the supervisor with the sub-agent, etc.  And since yesterday, and that new opus getting out on their logic of swarm of agents, understand that maybe the logic of building could be reversed in the sense that now, actually, their super agent would have the capacity to decompose, maybe, I would say, in a more robust way than I would myself be able to do it.  And so it's not really the same way of really looking at the problem. And I like starting with first the paper, instead of just asking AI to do something for me.

13:57 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, absolutely. What I consider.

14:00 - Nathalie
  is that probably these are two different logics, so where should I start? I've decided that in the days to come, I'm going to switch on Opus 4.6 when I work, so I switch to myself, maybe I need to change also my logics.

14:17 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, yeah, and I do think that there will be use cases where agents, self-building agent swarms can do it for you, but in all use cases we talked about, all uses, I've come in contact with, the human expert always adds 20% on top of what the best of the best models, the best instructions can do, unless it's like super polished for that specific use case.  So, I could see them like, you know, meeting the need and causing lots of hype, but still, what we learned today, if used very contentiously and with a lot of planning, we'll still outperform like self‑generated agentic flows.  So, yeah, back to the flow we talked about. Two problems. One is, like, the user is faced with an endless sandbox, which is disorienting.  The other one is, like, we need to balance their expectations. So how do we fix these two problems? Well, first is we systematically identify the desired result over a chatbot and make sure it delivers on that.  And we're more like, we're going to decompose that into product management, how to create a PRD to make sure you really polished out what you want the chatbot to do and not to do.  And then there's a more exciting part for the data scientists in the room, is how to create prompts that evaluate the outputs of your chatbot en masse and compare it to, like, previous version, or, like, how you would like the questions to be answered.  And picks out, like, the underlying tones, what was missing, which was more verbose, which response type was more warm.  Things that are... Things Immediately, immediately apparent when you read the output of the AI, and then that'll move on to how do we make sure that users' expectations are one with the model, so how do we bound the users' expectations to make sure we don't disappoint them, but neither do we just let them free roam and use our tool for something that will be embarrassing for our company.  And lastly, we will touch a little bit on user monitoring tools, so you see the flow of user inputs coming into AI, things coming out of AI, how to understand and statistically classify that data to understand what user needs you're meeting, how you're meeting them, and whether there are additional needs that you could meet.  So, first part, let's talk about how to evaluate AI. First thing to notice is we're not talking about typical bugs here that you would expect for traditional software.  Bugs are a behavior that developers don't want. about going to Thank And the user doesn't want. But we're now in a new era.  This is a psychological game. And to just as well be that the case is that the developers did want the experience, but the user didn't.  So, for example, there's this road trip planning tool, which we didn't build, but we very much closely consulted and collaborated with them on building it.  And you type in, like I typed in, ice cream road trip from SF to LA. And within like half a minute generates you, it only works in California, but it generates you a road trip from any point to any point in California and points out any points of interest that meets your query.  I see the Penny Ice Creamery still open in Santa Cruz. My friend used to work with way too much ice cream for her own good.  But anyways, it'll show you all the spots where you need to stop between SF and LA, which have state-of-the-art, historically good ice cream spots.  And you can type in literally. Anything in California will find that spot. Now, let's suppose the user typed in beach vacation from SF to LA.  It'll reach into Google and pull out all the beaches along the way, but the implied implication is that the user is looking for places where they can relax on the sand, not just sit in their car looking at the water.  So rocky beaches, like Point Reyes, should be filtered out, or at the very least, explicitly asked, like, do you want rocky beaches or are we looking for sandy beaches only?  And you wouldn't know something like that. Heck, even the user wouldn't really know that they don't want rocky beaches until they start looking around.  But yet, this is technically a bug. Like, you did not realize the user's needs. And let me go back to my slides.  This is very different from a software bug, right? It's more like a genie, which satisfies all your wishes, but sometimes messes it up because it doesn't.  Another type of bug, and this is the most exciting type of bug for me, and I think for you, and really a huge reason to build AI tools, is the bug where the developer had no intention of satisfying a need, but did.  Because you get to learn so much about user psychology and what they are looking for. You learn so much more, get such a bigger and better, clearer window into their psyche than you would ever get from a static website.  But that could also get you in trouble, so imagine the user for this road trip planner, this is something we talk through with them, the user starts asking for marijuana dispensaries.  They are legal, like in California, Google Maps has this information, and because the model pulls information from Google Maps, I actually don't know where they pulled their information, this is not proprietary, don't quote me on it.  But congratulations, you just became the FindMe420.com, the new marijuana dispensary website. Okay, but is this something you wanted? Does your company bode well with that?  What if a miner uses a tool? And so on and so forth. So there's no blatantly wrong answers here, but it's a great time to sit down with your legal team and start figuring out, okay, so like, what needs should we not meet?  Because it'll get us into hairy situations. What if it says Gulf of Mexico and, oh, lo and behold, it's Gulf of America, now Trump is mad at you.  You know, all these use cases that you would never think of, but now you have to because anything is possible.  So you want to get that fleshed out. And the primary use case is you do interviews, you do iterative prototyping, as in you build MNMVP and you run it by everyone, all the stakeholders.  They're just open-ended questions, like, what are your thoughts? They will have thoughts. Like, they will not have thoughts when you ask them, what should the chatbot do?  Well, once they start interacting with the chatbot, imagining it, this being public, they immediately get a visceral reaction. So this is a great great question.  Then you want like bullet points, throw in like very quick mini model that gets a response quickly kind of response.  Or is the tool not intended to educate but to stimulate the user's independent discovery? Then you do something like what we did for Give, where it gives a general response up top but then gives many references down below to actual websites with actual resources and highly encourage them to click on those and look it up themselves.  You know how to do this, like this is ASIN class three through and through. You just need to add just a little bit of an additional feature where like it floats to the user, not only the chunks that it pulled, but also where, what documents it pulled those chunks from.  So here, you know, it compiled this information by going to chunks in these documents. So not only did it summarize what it found in those chunks via RAG, it also gave links.  Next to the documents themselves, and these become a PRD. So let me stop there. Any questions on how you would collect the information and conceive of what your bot is to do or not to do?  Cool. Okay, so the PRD ultimately is your guide to what is a bug and what is a feature. It's not going to be your typical PRD.  I think I have one to show you. Yes, I didn't close the window. Great. So, like, this is a PRD for an actual client.  Overall description, this is written in a proposal elsewhere, so no need to reiterate. Then, like, top priority behavior. Give information about philanthropies.  An example, okay. So how do I identify a scam? How do I know what charity I should give to on subject X?  And then a bunch of secondary priorities, because your AI bot will not satisfy just one need, it'll satisfy many needs.  So great to think through, like, okay, so what needs will it satisfy that maybe we haven't intended, but would it be a great add-on anyways?  And then expected system response, so, like, if they could say hello, what should it say, how it should agree you, in response to general questions about philanthropy, this is how it should respond, in response to specific charity information, this is how it should respond, and what it should not do, it should not do, recommend specific charities, and so on and so forth.  And then below is a section about the source data, so, like, everything that you're going to throw in there for it to be a reliable guide on this information.  All of these interviews, and, and. And things that you collected from just Q&A and all these open-ended things, they all need to be captured in this PRD with both what it's going to do and what it's not going to do.  This is a great place to start, like, including, like, you should have talked about marijuana, and not only, like, the hard no's and the hard yes's, but also everything in the middle.  Should it never talk about marijuana, should it only mention dispensaries if asked for directly, but never mentioned as an aside, or maybe if you ask for marijuana, just report it straight through their program.  You know, you need to decide where on the spectrum that yes and no is. So, again, very different from typical software or website development.  We're not going to actually build out a PRD, because I think it's pretty straightforward, you know, once you have the raw information.  I feel like we all had enough experience, like, building PRDs and conceding projects that should be pretty straightforward. But any question on AI PRDs and how they're unique and what to consider there?  Cool. All right, let's keep burning through. Multiple folks said they're going to be here for recording, so hi to you all.  Let's just keep this compact for them. Okay, so let's time lapse and suppose you did all that and then you built the chatbot to spec.  How would you test with your instructions and guardrails actually work? Because again, fun element, instructing the model to do or not do something does not guarantee that it will follow those instructions or follow them in the way you intended.  Well, there's a few methods for testing. First line of defense is creating a baseline of optimal responses. Again, I showed those in the PRD.  Example question, example best answer. You would want like 10 to 20 of those. Maybe not in the PRD, maybe a separate section.  But like. Collect a good amount of those, and you'd want to actually write them down by hand, which I know who writes these days, but every word matters here.  want maximum human touch from best experts, like these are the best responses you could possibly imagine for 20 questions.  Again, this information could be hiding in your Slack or in your expert brain. Get that out and use that to write your own most original and best responses.  That's your baseline. And what you're going to do is use that to assess that against your chatbot. But if you put in 20 questions from your human experts and then ask the chatbot that you just built the same 20 questions, even if there are a couple sentences long each, you're going to have to read the equivalent of War and Peace every time you run a test, which is completely unfeasible.  So, use an LLM to test your chatbot. chatbot. Let me just walk through how you would do that. Generally, what you do is you run your app and see what responses came up with, then you send it to the state-of-the-art models, like Opus 4.6 or GPT-5, to compare and contrast those and evaluate them against the baseline you wrote.  Or, if you're updating an existing chatbot and you want to make sure that the quality didn't slide back, your baseline version A would be your previous version and your test version would be your new version.  So that way you run the 20 questions and you double check that the quality didn't deteriorate as a result of the changes you made.  And no matter how minor the tweak you make, best practice is, ideally, you want to run the test every single time.  Because AI is an embodied thing, yeah? Sorry to interrupt, Lev.

28:59 - Nathalie
  No, no, please.

30:00 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  If we didn't make any changes at all, and the model did not change at all, but we're in the pace of our world today, you know, we're constantly getting hit of, like, just so you know, Sun3.5 is going out of service next month, so we have to scramble and, like, try a new model and run these tests all over again on the new model.  So, yes, that demand will continue, but not because of drift. That's not something you need to worry about in our use case, because we're not owners of models.  If it was running locally, and, like, maybe you were retraining it for certain data, then, yes, is statistical drift on response as possible, but we're nowhere near that level, nor should we ever be.  And what makes it easier is, you only do it one node at a time. If you know the router works, you just shelf that away, you know the router works, until you add another node and have to retest the new node.  Thank so against the old ones, and make sure it still knows the difference, you can just not leave the router alone, or if it's like a separate agent, if you change this agent, you don't need to retest the other ones, that's the beauty of agent-centric flows, it's very modular, like you don't, once you got each node working, you can, you don't have to worry about it anymore.  But, if it's in one prompt, it's one agent, it's one prompt, even if you tweak something a little bit, it could change the whole thing, so you have to redo the test.  If this is very apparent in more like image generators, where like, if you just change the mood without the instructions, it'll completely reinvent the image, but the same thing is true for text.  It's like, minor changes can have very unexpected effects, because it's attitude change towards the whole task. So, what do these evaluation prompts actually look like?  I actually want to I just want to First, show you the result, and then show you the reverse engineer what the prompt actually looked like.  So I created this evaluation prompt, and I put it in the Notion page for resources for a week, so you can do this yourself and check it out later.  It is right here. It's for AskLibrary, it's a tool that I've invented, and I created a prompt which describes what AskLibrary is and how to evaluate its outputs, and then I created a set of test cases where version A is an older version of this hypothetical class library, version B is the later version.  So let's see what it does. Okay, so it's going question by question. It's seeing, it's looking for key differences between version A and version B, and then it breaks it down, like, regarding strategic value, which one is better?  Zero means neutral, plus one means version B is better. And then it creates a weighted composite score for that question.  And as you can see, it, like, here it's saying, like, strategic value was better for version A, relevance was better for version A, but quality overall was better for version B.  And so because strategic value was, like, 40% of the score, the weighted composite is negative 0.2. And it goes and does that for all of the 20 questions.  Now, first time, the very first time you do this, it's best to actually sit down and read through this, just to make sure your logic and the model logic align, that you don't need to add additional instructions to the evaluation prompt.  But once you did it the first time, you can... Can you tell me about Project Hail Mary by Andy Weir?  It's saying, Versions A, richer content creates genuine patron value, but it violates the knowledge-based constraints, as in it starts looking through the internet to look for additional information, as opposed to using only the data that I provided.  And this is a real trade-off, because patrons get more information, but it's not as trustworthy anymore, so it's up to you, like, is this okay for version A to do this kind of thing, is this something you want to transfer over to version B?  So, with this kind of trial and error, you can go a very long way, and you can imagine how time consuming this is, so like, you just created a new version, that took time, then you ran this test, you had some unexpected results, you're not sure what they mean, you take this to the experts, you're like, hey, there's this trade-off between my new version and the old one, is this more concise, do you think the user will like that, do you think they will not?  And you take it by the exact, you're like, hey, version A, A was looking through the internet, but it gave better results.  Is that okay? Is that risky? And if you get the answers from them, you create version C, and now you compare it against version A again and see if all of your needs were satisfied.  But, time consuming as it is, through this iterative process, you can really get a long way in building a chatbot without much kind of technical know-how, just through trial and error.  Now, any questions on, like, I'm going to break down the actual prompt I sent it here in a second, but any questions on the results or, like, what's possible, what the edge cases are?

36:42 - Nathalie
  Very clear. Okay.

36:46 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  I think the data science folks will find this exciting. And there, the reason why I insisted on the strategic value and all these elements is just, if I didn't ask for this, the response of the model from use case.  Case to use case would be more variable, let's actually see how variable this is, I have a max version, so I don't really care how many tokens I burned through, while we go through that, so I asked them to have these three specific elements to pay attention to, first of all to pay attention to where I want it, but also to make the output more stable, and then I asked it to compare each version against those criteria, and then give it a score of plus if, I think I actually swapped it, minus if version A, the old version is better, plus if version B is better.  This is a double blind test, I didn't tell it that version A is the older, probably worse version, version B is a better version, because just like a human, they are swayed by that kind of, by that kind of like, talked  If you care about from use case to use case, and then once you realize that your test prompt is stable enough, you can just using it, use it from there on out.  Whenever you make any changes to that node, you can just turn to that evaluation and go for it.

40:19 - Alex Rolleigh
  And is the file that you're putting in here to get at the node level, like for the routers, is this like the full trace file, or what is in here?

40:29 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Just, just, this is the valid test use case, just like question that I asked what the model responded with, question response.

40:37 - Alex Rolleigh
  Okay, so not the like underlying, so then how is it extrapolating with, like what router it went through from this?

40:45 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  The router, no, sorry, those are two separate tests.

40:49 - Alex Rolleigh
  Okay, okay, just making sure, I like, I feel like this is, okay, so the router testing would be a whole separate thing, this is just purely user level, not the Yeah, this is like a specific agent, this specific.

41:00 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  It could spitting something specific out, and I'm only testing that. was just saying it could use just as well, it could just as well build something like that for a router, then you would just have the router be the end note and just record what it spits out into your chat.

41:13 - Alex Rolleigh
  Perfect. Thank you. Yeah, thanks for clarifying.

41:17 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Two things to really pay attention to is you really want to make sure you're keeping track of version history, what prompt changes you made, when, what you tested, what didn't, because that's that gets very confusing very fast.  And you want to really make sure your PRD is set up, because you can imagine, so you're changing your little different versions, you're tweaking your evaluation criteria.  If the things you want to achieve are changing after that as well, which happened to us where a client comes back and is like, can we actually not do this and do that instead?  Then you have like versions within versions within versions, and that becomes like a data management help very quickly. So, get your PRD screen.  As soon as possible, there'll be plenty of ambiguity ahead in your journey, so get as much clarity on what you're trying to achieve as early as possible.  So that's the using LLM to analyze, then there is red teaming, which is using humans to analyze LLMs, but not for proper behavior, but for improper behavior.  Red teaming means intentionally trying to make your AI say something embarrassing or off-putting or out of pocket. And this is a great way to shape the knots of your list.  And the way we usually do it is we typically get people in swarms synchronously. So, you know, schedule a Zoom call, have like 10 people from a team join, and be like, look, this is the AI bot, this is what it's supposed to do.  Now be creative and try to throw something at it. Okay. Okay, so let's time lapse again. You've launched, you are, you're now, users are using it as public.  Now, how do you make sure that what your users are using it as intentionally and you're satisfying users' needs?  So you do something like Arise Phoenix. This is a free tool. You literally just connect your API keys, you know, that you threw into, into your chatbot.  You literally provide Arise Phoenix with your API key and it just starts tracking everything that went through that API key.  So, every router node going through it, every, every output node. It's pretty simple. It's quite straightforward. And as you can see, you do have to, like, explain to it, like, look, I have this agentic team.  I have these routers and agents, build, build. And in 2019, the blithely years of 2019, we invented first topic modeling, which is just a classification LLM.  It doesn't say anything, it doesn't generate anything, and we talked about this in class one, so I'll go through it quickly, it just puts things in buckets, but unlike humans, which predefined the buckets in their head, they're like, okay, so I have this data, I know I'm going to have bucket A, B, B, C, now I'm going to start sorting, these buckets come into existence as it sorts, so it's looking for some information and actively inventing what buckets to invent for this data set as it's going through it, and this is for like, you know, as I think I was saying earlier, this was for a client who discovered that a lot of your users are Spanish speakers, because it had all of these Spanish user queries, It's of  And that would have been really hard to statistically figure out just looking at the data or asking LLM about it, but here it actually shows you statistical digits as to what percentage fall into that bucket and how prevalent that is, and within that bucket, what sub-buckets that could be broken into as well.  It takes some learning, because here, when I just pulled it out of a box and used it, it put everything in one bucket, so there's some statistical levers I need to pull in order to get it to understand how much ripping apart and how much bucketing it needs to do, and how, if there's one topic that captures it all, maybe filter out all the other outputs and then run it again only on that topic.  So I'm sure your data science would be better off at this than I am. It's not like a right Phoenix where you just take it out and it's immediately apparent how to use it.  Some data engineering is required here. But very powerful once you do, because again, this is a great window into the user's head.  So that is on evaluation. Just closing the subject generally. Next I'm going to dive into UX and LUX, language user interface.  But any questions or anything that piqued your interest on evaluation?

49:40 - Nathalie
  Close.

49:45 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Okay.

49:47 - Alex Rolleigh
  I have to drop in five minutes for another call, but I can't wait to watch the recording on the LUX part.

49:55 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Cool. Yeah, it is really fun. Yep. Please watch the recording. And, you know, the next lecture is the walkthrough.  Hope to see you there. If not, the meeting, Calendly link does not expire. After class ends, feel free to schedule a meeting whenever time allows.  This goes out to all of you. Whenever time allows, there's no pressure to meet now. Feel free to hit me up.  Don't be a stranger. And let's build something, because I promised you that deliverable. Cool. So, yeah, this will be the last subject we cover in this course, besides the walkthrough.  It breaks my heart as of here. Well, it feels like a long journey, at least to me. But, yeah, I say it's kind of the juiciest for last, because this is how you turn a boring chatbot into theater.  And it's really fun. There's a lot of considerations. But first, want to break into two classifications, like two dimensions to how the user interfaces with the AI model.  Once more, the one we're more familiar with, the button. .. ... ... This is like us living in the DOS era, when the only way you can use a computer is by typing something in, and think of how much bigger the user pool was when we just created our first operating system.  So if I didn't make it clear already, UX is extremely important as to how receptive your users will be to your tool.  This includes both external users, you're making it public, but also internal users, if you're offering to internal team, I bet there's some folks that are apprehensive, they're like, ah, do I want to use this?  And yeah, Alex, you're totally right. That blank box is completely cognitive overload. What do I do? What do I not do?  What is okay with company policy? It scares people away, never to bring them back. The best way is to offer some examples, offer some  Some ways to start interacting, get the ball rolling in any way, like a lot of folks and AI providers add a little button at the bottom, like try this, like ask for weather, you click on it and immediately generates weather forecast, and then you start thinking and start using.  One thing to point out is how you shape your reacts very much depends on your end users. This is an internal tool, and it's for experts, you might not shy away from giving them lots of different options, make it look like a cockpit of an airplane, have a bunch of buttons, explain things in a very specialized terminology, or if it's for a beginner who wants to feel like an expert, just give them one button, two inputs, a snippet of instructions, click, and watch the magic happen.  Dev and AI, which turned out to be I think a quack organization, but I love the way they set up their like expert coder driven.  coercive standpoint. You asked it to generate a piece of code, and it has four different windows, one generating code, one in an ongoing interaction with you, one searching the web and showing you how to search the web, and one executing the code and looping on the errors that it made.  So you get to see the full brain of AI doing its magic as it's running. And I think this is very powerful for experts who, like, right off of bat, understand what code is, what a terminal is, and what AI is.  This would be complete turnoff for any beginner user, and Devon AI did not prosper in the end. Now compare this to Microsoft Co-Pilot.  Not AI that I personally love, but they offer some pretty great example use cases. As I said, they're pretty, like, boomer friendly.  They show you these visual examples of what you can ask. They have these different use cases, so it's not just like I use this prompt for everything, like do you want to design, do you want to create a vacation planner, do you want cooking assistance, and every time you choose one, they have ready made options that you can just click and see it work, also it offers you options to be more precise and more creative, lots of options, not too many options, but enough for you to be like, start making choices by clicking, which people are more used to, because they've been on the internet for the last 30 years, rather than typing something out, and that is really the goal you want to do, is you want to think about your use case and offload as much as you can, to button clicking, as opposed to, to, to just right away, kind of typing away.  This California did this very well, they first have this questionnaire, as to like, how long do you want the road trip to be, How  Three days or more. Are you traveling with kids or just adults? And do you want to go like off a beaten path or urban?  And then, only then do you click road trips and then it shows you the road trip generator, and the road trip generator starts generating something for you.  So it eases in your experience into the AI. By the time you're using AI, you don't even know you're using AI, you just clicked a bunch of buttons and got something really cool.  Ideally, the user is not even like being blatantly made aware that this is an AI tool. You're just like, you're just getting a more enhanced experience.  So highly recommend that approach. Even for my internal tools, it's something that I do. You know, this is my writing editor.  It is just a bunch of prompts in the back end. I use this every single day. And I just put in brackets the thing I want to edit.  And then I click sentence polisher to just write it better or synonym finder to just write it a little bit differently.  And that's really, I could have just used prompts, this was very easy, but I much prefer clicking buttons, even for me personally, rather than typing it all out and making decisions verbally.  These things can get very creative. This is my coworker, Jeremy, created this. This is what I want to show you.  So you type in a prompt, or this is a piece from Shakespeare. And then you have a coordinate plane where you choose, do you want it to be more ominous or more auspicious, or more literal or more metaphorical.  And then anywhere on here, you can click, and it'll generate you a new version of that text that hits that balance of more literal, more ominous, more metaphorical, more auspicious.  You just click play, and it generates all of the entire coordinate plane for you. And then you click around, and start wondering, like, which one do you  So, like, very literal, worshipping power will inevitably lead to an all-consuming sense of weakness and fear, sure does sound like Shakespeare, or, more metaphorical, in a sanctified quarter of veneration, prostrating oneself before a throne of dominion, will leave you groveling in a supoltures of frailty.  Wow, I don't even know some of these words. Either way, saying the same message, but in a very, very different way, and you get to choose without writing anything, you just click around.  So, I love these creative use cases. It really shows you just how underexplored the UX of AI is. We literally just, like, we're doing what is called horseless carriage thinking.  Let me see, there we go. Where, where, you know, where, you know, it's a parallel to, like, when we first invented cars.  go. There we we we go. There We literally just took carriages and put an engine on them and called it a car, but it took years for us to completely reinvent what the driving experience should be to arrive at what we now today know as cars.  We're at the same place with AI, you know, we've been writing documents for the longest time, so when a document writing tool comes along, we just write a document to get a document back.  That's an extremely old school way of thinking, but there's really no kind of like interaction for like a Wikipedia for LLMs.  I've showed you What If Pedia, that's a great example of like a more Wikipedia-esque experience of LLMs. Or Figma for LLMs, which I know since I made that slide, they've been actually really adamant about that.  Or like Reddit for LLMs, which now that, which McAulvey changed their name like three times, that new agent Reddit that only contains AI agents.  others. Applause. don't There are many ways to cut the cookie. For example, in web development, when developers develop websites in China, they build something like this.  Lots of options. People are very used to very busy and cluttered websites. And they like it because all the options are obvious here.  You know everything that this website has to offer. Then European developers came into the Chinese market and started doing stuff like this, and the users were pissed.  They were like, where are all my additional options? How do I know what I can do with this? Why do I have to go down a chain of pages to get an option I expect to see right away?  There's no right answer. Who your user is very much defines what the user About AI uses, we saw that the user either hangs on the AI page of the site for under 10 seconds, or if it's more than that, it's usually more than 10 minutes.  So you really just want to get the foot in the door, get their attention, not freak them out right away.  Once you got that ball rolling, they get sucked in and they really devote to the experience. So buttons, initial kind of interactions go a long way in making the user experience much more pleasant and favorable.  Because AI is getting a lot of bad hype, people don't want to use AI tools. But if they are eased into it and don't even first realize that they're using AI because they're just clicking buttons, then they're much more receptive to the idea.  So yeah, highly recommend you really think outside the box with the UI. As I said, there's lots of outside the box.  And as the expert, you're the most likely to know your user best and really revolutionize how AI can apply for Fath-specific subfield.  Now, the other more important part that is more directly applicable to our learning here is the LUX, or the Language User Interface.  First, about the pain point. The thing is, when you build generative AI products and call it your own, it's not just SaaS.  It's not treated by users as just software as a service. Because now that it can talk, the user feels like, they don't feel like, oh, this is a good product or this is a bad product.  The psychological impression is that they just called your representative on the phone and started talking to them. So if your generative AI app misbehaves, the user's left with impressions as if he calls your sales rep and he started hallucinating.  So in order to avoid the risk of damaging your image in such a way, it. button. view. Click You need to engage in a new art of tweaking this producer, this language producer, to speak like you, to use a style like you, to really replicate your, the spirit and zeitgeist of your organization.  And this really is something we have, this is something we never had to do before, because the process is dynamic, so like editing this, and tracking it, and tweaking it, it's not something like editorials usually, or teams which are responsible for producing content, usually do, you know, they're quite at a loss, it's like how to approach AI.  And we just learned today, how to use evaluation prompts in order to move AI in the right direction, but this is far from intuitive.  Usually content generators have no idea, content creators have no idea how to shape the LUX. So let's talk about how we would do that.  First, what is it? Yeah? think the issue in the company is that very often that question of are many groups of

1:06:00 - Nathalie
  What's the voice of the company is something which has not been formalized. There are some little companies which are really, I would say, brand-focused that do this.  But if you go in the manufacturing sector, for instance, even when they interact with their client, I would say that the culture of the company happens somewhat by chance, rather than because it has been really thought of.  And what I understand between the lines in the language UX that you are thinking of, it's a question of designing something like a style blueprint for how you want your chatbot or your agent to interact with the user, meaning that it needs to have clear guidelines that speak authentically like you.

1:06:55 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, you're on to a very good point here, exactly what I was about to bring up. Okay. So The LUX is not just like the words that it uses and the style of communication.  It also inevitably, baked into that is the logic, the attitude, and ultimately the relationship the model builds with the users.  There's a lot of soul searching that the organization needs to do, even if you're a content generating, or a content producing organization, or a brand organization.  Even then, maybe you have specific guides on the style of your delivery, but I bet they didn't think through the logic and the higher level psychology of their content delivery.  So all that needs to be spelled out concretely now, and especially for industrial industry focused organizations, I bet they didn't do.  And none of that, nonetheless, I bet they do have a style. I bet some consistency did emerge from like, if you look across all their...  model to, like, speak like a cat. All of these responses are technically correct. Like, you could say, as an AI language model, I don't actually have the ability to be a cat.  However, I can help answer his questions about cats, let me know how it can help. Or, in the other extreme, you could say, meow, meow, meow, meow, meow, meow, All of these answers are correct, and everything in between is correct, but only one is correct for you.  And there are lots of things to consider as to where on the spectrum you like. I love this, um, parable, I love this story, of how when Siri first came out in 2013, I think it was 2013, they already had the technology to make it sound human.  Um, but, at the time, they deliberately made it sound robotic. Why? Because in test cases, when they made Siri sound human, the user began engaging with it as a person, and expecting it to do all the thing as a human,  But in 2013, there was no AI, so obviously it could only do preprogrammed things. But when they made it sound like a robot, people's expectations unconsciously dropped, and satisfaction, as a result, rose.  So this is one of those ways, means to subtly signal to the user what the experience should be, and how expansive it should be.  Like, if you have a model just respond in one sentence responses, you'll understand, okay, this is a fact, a fact producer, not something that I should turn to write an essay about a specific subject.  And of course, there's great, great stories about how companies have totally blundered this, and did not address this at all, like Bing, which started harassing and attacking its users for using it, which is why nobody will remember Bing, or its cousin Internet Explorer.  But . . . The larger point is LUX is very much an unexplored terrain. As I said, this is very much horse's carriage.  There's very many use cases we have not explored, and there's great, great communities where people are just throwing a pasta at a wall and seeing what sticks.  Let me see if any of these still work. These are just some that I found back in the day.  This is a comic book writer. Yeah, let's do Detective, Dog, and Rain. Hopefully it still works, but instead of generating images, it generates you a comic book that goes on indefinitely, that you can just generate something for your kid right away.  Again, you can see how this is just an image generator with some intermediate prompts, and voila, you just have a completely new UX.  Another one that I love is one that just crashed and no longer exists, but it's an infinite canvas. So you upload an image, or generate an image, and then you select an area to the right, and you're like, please continue this image in the same style and logic to the right, and it just continues generating it.  I wonder if I can find the working one, because it is an impressive use case. Let's see if this works.  Oh, it's a GitHub. I'm not going to just spin this up right now. But you get the general idea.  It just continues generating the image as far out as you want, and it continues. Like if an arm was coming out of a corner of where the image was cut off, it will continue generating that person with the same wardrobe that the arm was in.  Again, very much using the same model, same functionalities that we already used to, but in the. It's very new way.  So I highly encourage you to go to HuggingFace Spaces and just click around. There's a lot of fun use cases.  They're all free. It's an open community. So anything on here, you can just start, where did I go? Spaces.  Yes. I'm going just go back to the homepage. Most of them are kind of like finicky and broken. Not most of them.  A good amount of them. But if you sort by trending, the most trending ones are usually the ones that are most stable and reliable.  Open space. So you can, anything you see that is functional here, you can just download from GitHub and start using without any kind of paying any royalty to the creator.  So really a lot of interesting use cases to kind of expand your mind and get your client like thinking about like what is an end of.  bit of a way for them to start applying their AI. Like how to get them thinking outside the box.  Where's my slides? I close my slides. I'm going go back to my slides.

1:14:17 - Nathalie
  Just one question. I'm not very solid on the technical side, but when you download something which has been created on a repository in open source, which has been developed by somebody else, do you incur any security risks at the end of the day?  Or are there some kind of guardrails or whatever that can help you understand when it is safe to just download and test?

1:14:50 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  There is a very real concern about shadow companies or shadow intermediaries between you and providers. There's like, if you...  If go to some kind of like free AI text generator, no sign up, and you just click on one of these to start using it, yes, they have, you know, something like Arise Phoenix on the back end, and that they will see everything that you that you put in there, and what the model responded.  Now, this is very different from something that you see on Hugging Face Spaces, because here, this is hosted on Hugging Space, and you would fork this, you would create your own version, you would copy all the code, you would throw in your own API key, and you just became completely independent for Hugging Face, you're only on your own device.

1:18:00 - Nathalie
  Someone else on which I don't have the capacity to identify what has been done in the code, because I'm not a coder, and it's there that I was wondering if just downloading and testing would wouldn't incur some security risks for me.  No, so yeah. Because you see, that's actually, I'm just echoing what I heard about the agent swarm you were mentioning, OpenCloud.  So, well, apparently there were major security issues with this, of what I'm very surprised of, because I understand that it has been coded by a senior developer.  Yeah. And yet, it had those security fragility, which have been just imported by all the people that have installed OpenCloud on their Mac minis or whatever.

1:18:55 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah..amp. chee... That Well... There's one thing on Mac mini on your local device, and another one is one that is interfacing through Telegram, because, yes, it was a professional developer, but it was his passion project.  He doesn't have a security team, not a sophisticated security team working on it, so whatever he threw in Telegram was probably easily hackable.  This reflex is great. So, like, you have this website use case where it just transcribes your text. So, yes, if I throw my text on here, I don't know who the creator of Parakeet STT is and what their desires are, nor do I know how good Hugging Face is at keeping it private.  But, and this is like OpenClaw through Telegram, but if I go to their GitHub repo, download this, put in my own API key, run it in my local device, or my own cloud infrastructure, this is totally safe now.  dx. problem, this Like, we want to make sure that you have the best experience that you could have, so if you're not ready to give us a 9 or a 10, please reach out, and we'll do everything we can to make sure that we can get you there, and if not, we would happily refund your tuition, because we do stand behind Maven's satisfaction guarantee and want to ensure our satisfaction ourselves.  We ended up eight minutes early, so if you want to use this time to just, you know, air questions or explore things, we can just start office hours right now.  Otherwise, I'll see you next week.

1:21:40 - Nathalie
  I think that we will see each other next week. This week has been a bit special for me, because I was still on the thesis defense jury this week, so not working so much on AI, but I'm going to accelerate on that.

1:21:55 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  I'll the days to come, then I will have more questions for you. Perfect.
