Roll-out and its Discontents: UX, Red Teaming and Observability - December 04
VIEW RECORDING - 111 mins (No highlights): https://fathom.video/share/axN3KApk5ECNPmuVUSqgjuJM6Ace6Qyg

---

0:00 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Good to see you. Yeah, good to see you.

0:03 - JP Elliott
  How are doing? Good, good.

0:05 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  How are you?

0:07 - JP Elliott
  Oh, busy, but trying to… I'm always doing too much. That's my main issue. Oh, yes.

0:16 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Well… No, things are good.

0:19 - JP Elliott
  Yeah, Thanksgiving last week, obviously, right? So that was like, it was a pretty busy week. And then Friday, I couldn't make it because my wife was like, I had stuff to do family-wise.

0:31 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Oh, yeah. But yeah, it's good.

0:34 - JP Elliott
  mean, and everyone right now, because everyone's trying to get to the end of the year.

0:38 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Mm-hmm. I think people are, you know, corporate worlds are crazy.

0:43 - JP Elliott
  So I'm trying to sell my program out for January and launch a new program in March.

0:50 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Like a new cohort or a new program? Totally new program called Next Gen HR Academy.

0:56 - JP Elliott
  It's a year-long program.

0:57 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Oh, yes. I remember talking about it. That's right.

1:00 - JP Elliott
  Yeah, I'll probably come back to you on that. think it'd be fun to have.

1:02 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, please do.

1:04 - JP Elliott
  Well, mean, Zen and I are working through the marketing materials. I've had like 50 plus calls with HR leaders.  I've got a good base to sell it from. So now I'm just like getting all the faculty together and all that stuff.  So yeah, that's good. I mean, that one doesn't really sell till March. I'm not as stressed, but it's like having two programs at once is really not easy.  Yeah, absolutely.

1:32 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  that's happening.

1:33 - JP Elliott
  But yeah, that's good. mean, it could be worse. This is pretty funny. This cozy coffee shop. That's actually really funny.  Oh my God, relax. Yeah, it's.

1:42 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  300,000 people have like subscribed to this.

1:44 - JP Elliott
  That's nuts.

1:47 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  It's just the safest, you know, base medium. That's why I picked it. It's because it's just like you can't lose with this.

1:57 - JP Elliott
  Right. That's 50 million.

1:59 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  million. 50 million. start, see now.

2:02 - JP Elliott
  Yeah, that's, that's crazy, someone's making money off that, guess.

2:06 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  If everyone's making, if someone's making, you know, sometimes you have to make money by creating something very nuanced and intense, and sometimes you just create something very simple, and just satisfy the very basic need that's very common, and that'll do it.  Yeah, exactly.

2:24 - JP Elliott
  mean, it's like we're overthinking it. And there's like 8,000, almost 8,000 comments. That's also insane.

2:30 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, I wonder what people are talking about. What, what, what would you possibly say, like? Stop scrolling through comments, it's a front top comment.  gonna like that. Uh, I think this port's over well to AI, like we are, um, we are like going through these like very nuanced approaches, and we totally have not satisfied the baseline of what everyone wants, like, but nobody gets.

3:02 - JP Elliott
  Yeah, I mean, it's hard, right, because what you're teaching is hard, too, and so everyone's kind of different. Hi, Zen.

3:10 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Hi, Zen. Nice to see you.

3:15 - Zen Galvan
  Yeah. Our Internet's back, so it's good. Great. How you doing?

3:19 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Finally. Yeah, just more pleasure to talk to faces, but no pressure. Yeah, it is kind of hard. You know, like, YouTube was possible for years before it actually became a thing, and I read that YouTube started as a dating app, and on the dating app, there was a bit of explosion between, like, two pop stars, and they wanted to share a video as part of their dating app platform, and they're like, there's no way to share videos on  Internet. And there should be. So they're like, let's scrap the dating idea. Let's make YouTube about videos. And they created, like, something that to us is, like, now, like, duh, that should have been, like, existing right away.  But it's not until, like, we needed to share a scandal as part of our dating program that, like, we realized that it's needed.  Um, so we're very much in the same age in AI right now.

4:25 - JP Elliott
  Yeah. Oh, yeah. I don't think we know what, no one knows what's going on. And, um, yeah, it's interesting.  We, and think YouTube also, when it first started, there a lot of how-to videos too, right? I think if I remember that right, or there was another one that was, like, a how-to thing.  And it was, like, yeah. And then it became, like, TV, basically.

4:44 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah. But, like, on steroids.

4:47 - JP Elliott
  Yeah. Um, okay, great.

4:50 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  We have a crowd. I had a couple of people, uh, warn me that they're not coming through. And that's fine.  I will, um, I'm gonna share- Like, I feel like an apprehension that every presenter has in every lecture is that, like, you know, I inevitably, I'm talking theory because I try to generalize, I want to talk about things that work for everyone, because if I go into all the niche applications that these baselines really exist for a purpose of, like, I would have to triple the amount of content, and only half of it will resonate with half the people.  Like, I have to stick to universals in my lectures, in my async, that's why the one‑on‑ones exist for, like, so we can take this raw material and actually put the rubber to the rug, because the reality is, if we don't do that, like, you might have an aha moment now, you might have a pleasant experience, but within a week, you're going to forget all of it, because it does not apply to your life.  It's not until, like, you see this in action that you will actually, it'll actually sink in, and I just want to see.  That what I create actually is coming to life and coming to some purpose. So please, please, please, after this is our last lecture, this is our last session, it is not a good buy, there is no demand that you stop talking to me, please continue to schedule times with me, I owe you all a prototype by buying this course.  So, like, whenever you are ready, like, schedule a time with me, and I'll, we'll build something, that'll be really fun, and you'll walk away and be like, wow, I made that, that's, I can be proud of that now.

6:35 - JP Elliott
  Okay. Yeah.

6:39 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  So, yeah, open offer, indefinite, welcome to week, whoops, not week three, week four, last session, been a long journey, at least it felt like, as such, for me.  We, we, week one, we've learned about how to personalize prompts and build the backdrop. This of our culture, our tone, our attitudes, just the universals that apply to all of our inquiries.  On week two, we learned about agentic teams and how to hair split decision making so it will replicate the way you make decisions when satisfying users as humans.  Now, with agentic teams, you can replicate that with agents. Then we moved into data, which is really the heart of the matter.  That's the reason why we're all here is because that's business intelligence in the title, after all. Which you might wonder, like, why did we get to that only in week three?  Well, we've been working with data the whole time. It's just, if we didn't do the first two weeks and you delved straight into the data part, because it doesn't have any context or decision handling, it would have been very underwhelming.  It would have been something you could have built in five minutes, and it would have been a total failure in actually reproducing our methodology, even though all the hard facts are there.  So that's why we went through such a long journey. that's not a a long journey. Turn And today, we're going to basically create another backdrop, but not before the app, but after the app is made.  So you made your decision-making team, you plug in your data, it's talking, it's giving you answers that are correct, but without a user interface or a way for a user to connect with it, it's kind of like building a plane without no pilot seat.  Like, it's great, it's powerful, but without any way to steer it, it's kind of useless. And you might wonder, like, well, why do we need to create a UX when ChatGPT gets away with just creating a box to put text into?  And that was enough to make that the fastest growing app in human history, so why do I need to do more?  Well, the reason is, there are generalist applications. They want to appeal to everyone, and so don't want any buttons to suggest a specific use case.  If you do that‑ That you're missing out on a lot of opportunities for creating powerful user experience, just because you're deciding to stick to the bare bones.  The bare bones that you see in ChatGPT, it's kind of like, I said this in the last class, kind of like DOS, back when, before operating systems, where you only could type in stuff, and stuff, and written stuff came out.  Compare that to how much more niche and limited this experience was. It was still powerful, still a universal machine that could do calculations across use cases, but compare that to the operating system, where you're navigating through space, you were born basically knowing how to use it, because it relies on your most basic intuitions, and it is still universal, but has all of these ways to make the experience easier.  Well, there are also dimensions like that to AI applications, but there's actually two dimensions. There's one new one, so there's one old one, which is the UX, that's a familiar one, the buttons, the toggles, the options.  And there's a new dimension called the LUX, or the style of communication that the model adopts. We're going to dedicate the rest of the session today to these two.  We're going to start with the UX because we're all familiar with it. We've been using apps and software for probably most of our lives.  Unfortunately, there's not much you can do in building UX in FlowWise. Because it's a purely, it's intended as a purely backend application.  There's a lot you can do for LUX, and it's the new and hot thing anyways. So I feel like that would be the more exciting thing to talk about anyways.  Yeah, Monique, you had a question?

10:43 - Monique
  Yeah, am I off mute? Yeah. Is this what we would call conversation design?

10:49 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yes. Okay.

10:50 - Monique
  So LUX is language user experience.

10:54 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  It also has a name conversation design. There's not established terms. People are already calling AI‑related dimensions all kinds of things.  LUX is what we said before, but it's the same thing. Like, you're designing the communication and the way the model interacts, and there's a lot to talk about there.  So even just calling it by a single term is kind of like a misnomer because UX, you're like, okay, so this is like what you're looking at when you load the app.  But the LUX is a bottom as well. There's no way to comprehensively define it because it's all of the language and how it is spoken.  But let's talk about the first one first because it's familiar and it's manageable. UX is something we rarely see in AI apps, and that's really a shame because this is the wild, wild west.  And from a developer side, the lack of UX beyond the chat box that you see in OpenAI presents a challenge because the app can technically do anything.  Even if you create an app that That is specifically talking about HR or, I don't know, grocery selection, like, technically, if the user asks it about, like, how the totalitarian regimes will rise, it will answer that question unless you explicitly tell it not to.  So that's a problem number one that we need to solve with UX is there's no boundaries to the sandbox.  And we've talked a lot about how to create these boundaries on the back end, but there's no way to, we have not talked about how to communicate those boundaries to the front end.  Of course, we can give a paragraph instructions to the user, being like, this is what this is for, this is what you can do, this is what you can't do, but let's face it, nobody reads those anymore.  They'll just click away and try to do things and then be disappointed when it doesn't do what they want.  So we need to subtly guide them into using the chat box as a pendant. need to, under the skin, between the vines, kind of convey, like, hey, this is a grocery, not a history app.  And this run, this is also... And exacerbated by the second problem is that at this point, people, when they approach AI, have these giant, exaggerated expectations, thanks to all the fiction writing across the century, thanks to all the AI writing in the past five years, they're basically expecting you to do all the things that human does and more.  So we're kind of facing this impossible challenge with UX of constraining their expectations without disappointing them. And the way you would do that heavily depends on who your user is.  There's no one way, no one silver bullet to solve this. So for example, if you're building a UI for experts in the field, like yourself, you might not shy away, like it's an internal tool for your fellow coworkers.  You might not shy away from something that looks like a cockpit of an airplane, have a bunch of elements that they can change about your backend prompt, explain things in a very specialized terminology specific to your industry and so on.  You're going to be assured that you're not going to be scared. Or maybe this is a general tool. Then you just want one button, one very clear instruction, slap it and see what happens, and oh, my gosh, how fun.  Look, just did something for you. So here's an example of the first one. This is an AI developer tool.  It's like a copilot. And you can see it has four different windows. Each of us is showing something the agent is doing.  It is writing code, doing research on how to write code, running tests in browser in live, and so on.  And then you're watching how to do all of this simultaneously. So very overwhelming if you're not a programmer. Even if you're, like, a programmer that is not used to dev an AI, this would be a lot.  This is a fat learning curve. But if you do mount that learning curve, you could imagine this is very powerful because you can just do all these things simultaneously.  On the other hand, we have Microsoft Copilot. They offer some, you know, pretty examples up top that are very convenient to the eye.  Oh, you can code. can draw pictures. How nice. Oh. We have a few suggestions for prompts. Here, I want to learn a new skill.  Where do humans need sleep? We have a suggestions and you can just click and just watch the model go.  We have a few, you know, we have a copilot, we have a designer, we have a vacation planner, we have a few cookie cutter chatbots on the right.  So very, we try to flatten the learning curve as much as possible. Just so like you don't need to write anything, just click buttons and you watch something happen.  And by the way, all of this is just back-end prompts, I'm sure. Like the difference between precise mode, where is it?  Right here, you can choose whether it's writing in precise mode. There it is. Balance, creative, precise. I'm sure this is just a back-end instruction being like, for precise, that's just saying like, oh, be more strict and demanding details when you write your prompt.  You can do all of this. And then you just go to your front-end developer. And be like, connect this prompt to this button.  That's all it is. So this is all very accessible. And the driving point home, this is what I actually made on a weekend.  I just asked AI to create some robot, which we've got a robot, radio buttons, and each one of them is connected to a prompt.  So I read a lot. I needed an editor. was sick and tired of just copying my draft into a prompt and sending it to Claude, whatever.  So I just did this. I click on these buttons. Whoops. And it automatically plugs in whatever I write into a prompt.  I click go, and voila, I have a copy editor at my fingertips. It can absolutely help you throw something like this together on a whim.  It will require some Python because, again, Fathom is not built for this. But I am not a CS major.  I did it. So I'm sure we can do it together as well. So Freud Freud used Please, let's go on this journey together.  Here's a great example of UI done right, and we actually get a little of a behind-the-scenes insight here, because this is built by Visit California, it's kind of a non-profit that coordinates different tourism agencies across California.  We did not build this app, I wish we did, but we consulted them on the integration part. So what it does is you, it gives you a blank map of California, and you write what you want to do.  So you say, like, I want a trip from LA to SF, and what I'm interested for is ice cream.  And it will draw you a road from LA to SF, and point out all the ice cream spots on the way, so I can be sure that by the time I get to SF, I will be dead from diabetes.  But I'll try every single ice cream spot on the way. So very powerful, like, very huge wow factor. Very exciting.  But what we realized is when the user first got here, the playing field is so expansive that they're just completely at a loss as to what to do.  Folks were overwhelmed and lost for direction. Can I test for Ginger's Divine? Is that an ice cream spot in LA?

18:23 - Monique
  It is amazing. If you get a chance, yeah.

18:26 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  It's way too expensive, but it is seriously a meal.

18:29 - Monique
  It's so good, high-quality, all-over, ingredients.

18:32 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Sorry. try ice cream so rarely. No, it's all good. I try ice cream so rarely, I want to get the five-star experience when I do.

18:39 - Monique
  So I will totally do it. It's You know, I always land LAX, so I'll just drive over there.

18:49 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  So what they did when we got this feedback from users that this is just too much, too powerful, too many things at the same time, is instead instead of...  So instead of go to my California trip and just start from scratch, they take a quiz. Oh, is this a three‑day trip or a weekend trip?  Are kids involved? Is it an urban venture off a beaten path? Great, now we have some cookie‑cutter pre‑made trips for you.  You click on one of those. This is very not AI experience so far. They have this highway one classic road trip.  And then, and only then, can you click on the AI part and it will start customizing it from you.  So they created this trip for you. And now you can ask, add ice cream stops to this trip. So they hold your hand through the process.  They give you an example of what this would look like. And really an example is worth a thousand words, especially in AI.  This went so long in easing the user into it. Gertiche. then. temuUS Souls And really, it doesn't feel like AI to them anymore, at least not at first, like they are using an experience you're familiar with, and with buttons and controls, and service something pre-made, and then we get this exciting part, okay, so like I had this normal experience, now I can personalize it to exactly what I want, and this made the, just statistics wise, this made the usage much higher for the road trip planner.

20:27 - Monique
  Yomini, do have a question? Isn't this also kind of like the back of the napkin thing, where you're taking the whole process, and you're kind of breaking it down into small parts, and then, you know, like if I were doing this, I would do research to align those like small Lego parts of it to the customer's mental model.  Like what works, and what plugs into like their, or I would say like 80% of the use cases of how they kind of think.  And want to do this? I don't know. That's kind of how I was thinking about it, like, rather than throwing everything up at them and making it feel overwhelming.  That's a really interesting application.

21:12 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  I only thought of back a napkin in the Wizard of Oz process on the back end of, like, how do we do it?  How do we build this? But you're right. Like, for the user, you want to do the same digest. Like, don't just give it one giant heap of, like, here's the entire power of experience.  Use it as you will. Like, break it down into steps. And the great thing is, like, VCA, this is California, they had these pre‑planned road trips for decades.  You know, they polished them for a while ago. They knew that it resonates with our users. This is something that they've made, like, you know, over the years.  And then they use that as a stepping stone towards the, using the new AI tool. So, it's a great idea to, yeah, break.  Break it down into this box and whiskers plot and see what resources you have available already for your customers that you already know is useful for them and they're already using as an example of something to introduce them to then personalize it with AI.  So yes, very good point. Kind of a mind opener to me.

22:21 - Monique
  And then, too, you could think about that what should be a tool, what should be AI, but maybe I'm jumping the gun.  Do you know what I mean? Yes, you have that box and whiskers, kind of, like...

22:34 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah. Like, out of what you already have, and you're like, okay, so what do these things could, like, could be a nice stepping stone to AI?  Instead of, like, let's build the AI thing, how can we use our existing material to guide to the AI, go the other way.  Here's our existing material, which part of it can be enhanced by AI? That's a great idea. Kind of just sticks to the general ethos.  That's don't make AI work. What do you already have? What This Make what you already have enhanced by AI where needed.  Absolutely. Great point. So to recap, UI is a visual part of the interface, UX, UI. I know there's a total difference.  I should know this. I never really got it down. If anyone of you know what exactly the difference is, let me know.

23:23 - Monique
  Yeah, UI is like the, you know, UI is like the screen, right?

23:27 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  It's that kind of interaction layer, whereas UX is the entire experience end to end.

23:34 - Monique
  It could be service design, you know, like, we're backend stuff. I It's all the touch points for the user to have a good or bad interaction with the company as represented through the UI, yeah.

23:47 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  So, yeah, that's very relevant, actually, here. The UI is the buttons that we're talking about. The UX with AI is just this unencompassable field, which includes LUX.  Before we close on the UI part, one thing I want to note is that it very much depends on culture, national culture or company culture.  For example, China, people are very used to very busy and cluttered websites. And when designers from Europe came in and started simplifying the layout for leading companies, the users were pissed.  were like, why do I have to go down a trail of five pages in order to get what I want?  I would rather just see it right away in a giant sea of options, but at least I'll know how to get there.  And so, like, the design just didn't work, not because it was bad, but because, like, it just didn't resonate.  So, again, really drives home the point. You need to know and only you know the user and what they want.  So, that's why Google or OpenAI is never going to uproot you because they lack that unique insight into what your user wants and what experience vibes with them.  be used used to to Thank So now we kind of close the UI part now for LUX. Any questions on the UI before we move forward?

25:17 - JP Elliott
  All right.

25:19 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Cool. All right. So then the AI UI, or AI UX, kind of fun to say, but really the term we're going to go for is LUX.  So here's the rub. This is kind of the pain point. The thing is, when you build a generative AI product and call it your own, it's not software that you're offering to users.  Because the chatbot can talk, and I know I'm not breaking any grounds here, but here's what's not obvious. Because it can talk, users shape the relationship with it, not like a software.  They treat it like you're representative. They feel like they call your organization and someone picked up the phone in the other line.  That's what you're checking. What it feels like to the user. And the user doesn't just think, oh, this is a good or bad product.  The psychological impression is that of your organization as a whole. And if your gender of AI misbehaves, they're left with impressions if they call your sales rep and they just started hallucinating.  Just not a good look. So in order to avoid the risk of damaging your image in such a major way, you need to engage in a new art, the art of tweaking the produced dynamic language that it talks in.  So L-U-X, communication design. And historically, this is never something we had to do before in this particular way. We've done copy editing, but that's static text.  You created it, you edited it, what you see is what you get. With AI, you're facing with this bottomless well, because you ask the same question twice, it gives you different responses.  It's not about what responses it gave, it's about how it gave it, what implications it made, and what style did it approach it gave to you.  And so now we're ready to kind of define what is LUX. It's not just style and tone. It's also, to some degree, it's also like the logic, the attitude it took to the user, and ultimately the relationship the model builds with the user.  And that sounds like a lot, right? And from another life, I have a degree as a master of science and psychology, so trust me, I would not be the last one to underestimate just how much of an undertaking and an expansive field this really is.  The good thing is, this is something you can modify knowing all the skills we've already learned so far. Like there's no unique, you don't need to know coding, you don't need to know anything, you just need to do prompting, iterating, and splitting it between different agent specialists.  That's all there is to it and how to shape this. What to shape it towards is a different question.  So here's a case in point. This is really a bare bones example of what LUX is about. Well, suppose the user asks the model to talk like a cat.  All of these options are technically correct. So it could say, as an AI language model, I don't actually have the ability to talk like a cat.  However, let me help you answer some questions about cats. Let me know how it can help. Technically correct. AI cannot be a cat.  And it can also say, all right, I'm a cat now. How can I assist you in your perfect day?  This is the cringiest part of the entire series. We've moved on gracefully. Or you can say, meow, meow, meow, meow, meow.  The user is expecting one of these. The user will not bother telling you which one it wants. In all cases, the model is responding correctly.  It's only up to you to guesstimate which one of these the user is expecting. And in each one of your fields, the answer is different.  And there's only one right answer. The user wants one thing. So it has this purely psychological factor. But... It goes a long way in the user satisfaction of your app because, as I said, it goes a long way in realizing the expectations of the user and shaping the expectations.  As a case in point, back when they first came out of Siri, the bot that sits in your speaker and listens to everything you talk about in your house, back when they came out of it in 2012, they actually had the ability to make it sound more human.  But if you remember, back then, they made it sound very robotic, and that was by design, because in user testing, they realized that when they made it sound human, the user began engaging with it as a person and expecting it to do things humans could do, which back there, there was no generative AI, so it couldn't do those things.  And so they were more disappointed. Just by making it sound like a robot, people's expectations unconsciously dropped and satisfaction rose.  And this has a direct implication. And To building LUX here and now. Like, do you want them to talk like a kind of grandmother?  They'll expect good stories from her. Do you want them to talk like a program? They'll expect good code. They will not expect good blog posts out of it.  Just subconsciously, you just conveyed what it can and can't do just by shaping the way the model talks. Of course, there's a way to do those things very wrong, like what Bing did when it insults and argues with the user, and so that's why it's disappeared into history, like it's cousin Internet Explorer, but ultimately, there is this process, and I'm not delving into how to do it, because as I said, you already know how to do it.  You write in the prompt how you want the model to talk. What you're going for, what your goal is, that is the million dollar question.  What does your user want to experience? Do they want to experience something that, I don't know, helps them with their groceries, but also...  Like, is very friendly and communicating with them, and so you're expecting a pleasant conversation with them, or is it very automatic, where it's just like, you know, they give free response desires, and it just throws something in their basket.  The shaping of the experience is like the tall order of the day. Any questions so far about what I just talked about?

31:27 - JP Elliott
  Yeah, I get it. Cool.

31:32 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, big, big terrain. And I kind of like, I don't mean to overwhelm, but it just gets more and more kind of like expansive.  But really, you remember that through all of this ambiguity, your experience with the user and knowledge of the market will guide you through all of this.  And the power is, it will only guide you, it cannot guide anyone who did not have experience. that's a And think,  So why is it so ambiguous? Because there's no really bugs in the traditional sense here. What is a bug and what is functional is purely dependent on your use case and what you know about the user.  Because by traditional sense, a bug is something that the developer doesn't want and the user doesn't want. And traditional software, that's all there really is to it.  But because it's a psychological game, there's not all these additional dimensions. Like, some of the developers did want, but the users didn't.  For example, for a road trip planner, your system might create beautiful coastal drive itineraries when asked for a beach vacation.  But it's implied for the user, like, that's all the developer wanted. It's like, it's giving you nice beaches? Cool, we're done here.  But the user, of course, would want a beach that they want to sit on the sand in. Not spend hours in a car looking at the ocean from a rocky beach, like Point Reyes.  Yeah. They're very implicit. There's no way to find out ahead of time. Unless you are a tourist agency, you wouldn't know these details.  But if something the developers wanted, the user did not want. It's kind of like a genie, which satisfies all your wishes, but sometimes messes it up because they understood you too literally.  You got to look out for that in your AI application. The most exciting and funniest applications, I think, is applications that the developers didn't intend for, but users actually wanted.  And this can get you in very sticky situations. So imagine that the user asks this road trip planner for marijuana dispensaries, because marijuana is legal in California.  And it'll do it. It's on Google Maps. It's pulling this data from Google Maps. It'll go ahead and do it.  But is that something you want? Does your company bode well with that? Did you ever have a conversation on it?  What if a miner uses this as a public tool? What if a miner uses it to find marijuana? And so on and so forth.  So because now the playground is endless, this is a great time to sit down through executives, clearly document your position on a broad set of subjects, because now they're all fair game.  Better do it now than later with your legal team when your bot called it like the Gulf of Mexico and not, you know, what is now the Gulf of America.  What a time we live in. But yeah, lots of edge use cases to talk about now, because your bot can talk on any of them.  And I assure you, when you make your app public, there will be lots and lots of surprising use cases you never imagined.  I bet just from my personal experience, about 10% of them would be use cases that you were thought are completely out of the box, completely out of pocket, But it seemed completely natural and logical.  To the user. And it'll be your choice to kind of accommodate for that and maybe find new venues for application or restrict that and make it somehow clear to the user, like, look, this is not okay.  As I said, the big problem is there are no bugs, just opinions, and you have to involve your experts and your target audience and whoever knows anything about your target audience in order to guide you through this process.  Which is, you know, interviews, prototyping, surveys, that kind of thing. So I'm painting in broad strokes because there's really no other way to do it.  It's very personalized. These are just, like, the questions that will guide you in the right direction. I cannot give you any answers because they're all very use case specific.  The general advice is collect as much data as you can, as soon as you can. to see you then.  Amen. In order to paint, as clearly as possible, what the intended use case is, and how that experience should be shaped.  And you really want to do this in the very beginning, because there'll be plenty of ambiguities as is. So you really want as much clarity as possible before you take your first step.  The empowering thing is you can do that right here and now. You don't have to wait. You don't have to drop money for a developer.  You don't have to, like, learn coding or know anything about AI, really. You just want, like, you just want your dream application to be as clear in your head as possible.  Talk to all the execs. Talk to all the users right away. Get that dream image clear in your head and then start in your journey.  Yeah, any questions on this very ambiguous subject matter, I have marked it.

36:58 - JP Elliott
  No, I think it's interesting.

37:01 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, I think your point on the unintended consequences is really interesting.

37:08 - JP Elliott
  I think I've all experienced that when you use an app, and you're like, oh, I like what it's doing here, but it's not really what it's supposed to do.  But it's not really a bug, because there's not really a way to have bugs and AI the same way, right?

37:20 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Right.

37:21 - JP Elliott
  It's sort of what the instructions are doing, so interesting.

37:24 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, it's just, because, you know, in a technical app, you can click the buttons, you can jailbreak it, but even then, there's really so many, so many things you can do.  With AI, can do anything by default, and unless you constrict it, it will do anything, and so it's a completely new design paradigm.

37:42 - JP Elliott
  Yeah, it's crazy.

37:45 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, it really is. So that's why, like, collecting as much data as possible in the beginning, to know which guard rules to put, and how to put them, is a big deal.  It adds even more ambiguity. As to how hard you want the guardrails to be. Do you want it to just never talk about marijuana?  Do you want it to talk about marijuana only if explicitly asked for it and then it's okay? Do you want it to just, like, report them, automatically report them to their program?  Like, what is your approach? How hard are those lines for the model? Because you can specify those two. Again, using just words, instructions.  One way that I think is a nice thinking framework for this is to think through what is your call to action, even if it's very ambiguous.  Like, is it to educate? Do you want them to be inspired to learn about a subject? In that case, if so, then your LUX might be, like, paragraph long, multi-paragraph reports with many options for follow-up questions.  One use case I could imagine is, like, you know, a paragraph with branches as to, like, where you can go from.  I don't know why I haven't seen this yet. It's really easy to make. literally make a model, generate a couple follow‑up questions, and then ask your front‑end developer to take those and make them into branches, and that would be so much fun.  I actually want to build that myself. But that would be an educational promotion tool. Or maybe it's not so much to educate via AI, but to stimulate independent discovery by the user using static traditional search.  that was the intention of Ask Give, this chatbot we've created for Give.org. It provides advice on philanthropic giving as the general tool.  But they really didn't want the AI app to be the end‑all, be‑all advisor on who to donate to, because that's a lot of responsibility, and they did not want to be particular.  They are, like, their nonprofit as, like, a database of all of the nonprofits in the U.S. So because they didn't want it to be impartial, they should  So it gave only general information while providing ample resources from your own data sources and links to these charities that you could click on and read upon on your own.  So it will never tell you, like, between Red Cross and Doctors Without Borders, choose A or B. It will be like, oh, yeah, here's something about this, here's something about those guys, and here's a bunch of blog posts and stories, and here's a general methodology on how to think through that material.  But I'm not going to think through that material for you. So you have to think their ‑‑ you have to adopt their thinking pattern and then delve into the material yourself.  So I really liked their approach and how much they forced agency onto the user. And you know how to do this now.  This is a typical rag tool. just pulled the documents that they had, pulled chunks most relevant to the user questions, and mentioned the documents and pulled the chunks from.  That's all it is. So very simple to build and very powerful in terms of like stimulating independent discovery. can the user's with this.  Sorry, I'm getting a forced voice. I'm going to pour myself some sparkling water. One sec. Thank you for waiting.  I do like a dry run through before the lecture, so I end up like talking about three hours, and I get my glance to get really, great.  Thank Take the toll by the end of it. So whatever you discover, what that goes into is a product requirements document.  It's not your typical PRD because you can't settle for one use case because no matter how much you try, your AI app will not have one use case as we've talked about today.  So you would want a primary use case and then secondary use cases on top of that. Ultimately, this document will define for you what is the bug and what is intended use case.  So for example, you could have for VASGIV, their primary use case was general questions, answer general questions and provide general information about giving in the philanthropic sector.  And then it would provide an example of like a typical use case. So like, what charities support animal rights?  Um. And then ample description of what that response would look like. So description of an example, but also like, for a primary use case, response would be long enough to completely answer user and how and what the purpose is.  Just basically as much detail as you can. And then you would want to do, oh, am I coming through all right?  Yeah, we lost you for a second, but it's okay. Okay. I think that was just a hiccup. And then you would want to do the same thing for a secondary purpose.  So like the secondary purpose for give would be point the user to appropriate resources about philanthropy and giving. So that involves both UX, the buttons at the bottom, and the LUX and the way it can be.  That information. So this is your first step. First collect all the data. Try to make it as clear as possible to how you want the model to behave.  Fathom goes into a PRD which outlines primary, secondary, tertiary use cases, which involve examples, which involve long, long descriptions, detailed descriptions of what that will look like.  And really that's already like pieces of a prompt. These would then be a prompt. So you're having this gradual development experience.  Part of that experience is also limiting what not to do. Never talk about marijuana. Only offer dispensaries when asked for it.  So like a typical one is never say I don't know to a question. Just give follow-up suggestions or like point towards external resources, you know, because so we we, and and 1.  2. Because if you poorly defined to the user what the model can't do, and to them just keep saying, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, that's a frustrating experience.  So you'd much rather redirect their response towards something it does know, rather than be explicit. So, yeah, then create a very long list of do nots based on your position on different political, controversial subjects, as well as, like, you know, general things that you would want the model to not do, to not leave the user frustrated.

45:42 - JP Elliott
  That makes sense.

45:45 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, so this is like your, this is like your, your guiding principle, this is your North Star, this is PRD.  It's really not making it too detailed, that's like not a mistake you'll make. So just like pull all of your...  knowledge about your user into this PRD. It will go a long way to describe to the developers what is needed from them, to the subject matter experts what is needed from them.  Everyone can kind of start collaborating once they have this framework to go off of. Okay, so let's time lapse and suppose you did all of that.  Okay, so how would you test if your instructions and guardrails actually worked? Because again, fun element, instructing a model to do or not do something does not guarantee that it will not do or not do those things.  another fun fact. And there are a few methods to see if your instructions actually worked. And to, if maybe they worked, but not exactly in the way that you want in your PRD, how to slowly move it in the desired direction.  And by the way, if it is just ignoring your instructions, what you would do is you would slap them in a system prompt, slap them in instructions, you slap them in in  After the user input, just reiterate, do the same thing in the negative, like, do this, so don't not do this, put it in different forms, just keep drilling it until it really, eventually, it'll stick to it religiously, sometimes it just gets lost in the fray and starts ignoring things, and that's kind of like a brute force way to do it, but how do you figure out what your weak points are, which instructions are not followed or not followed correctly?  Well, the first line of defense is creating a baseline of optimal questions that you would expect the user to use and optimal responses, and you write this by hand, like, this is not AI, you organically do this, and then you use that, to use LLMs to test your AI app, so you use AI to test AI, using that, those 20 base questions and 20 ideal responses, as, as,  something to compare against. So to kind of walk through the process in more detail, you create your baseline, then you create a minimum viable product, you run it, and get a set of responses.  Great. You see that there's something wrong. You make some modifications, and now you need to see if it moved in the right direction, in the direction of your ideal.  So then you would, you need to plug both of those in and say, like, I need, here's version A, here's version B.  don't tell it which one's which. You don't tell it that version B is the latest one or version A is the older one, it's a blind test.  And then you, you say, okay, so compare, compare these to the baseline, which I'm providing, and point out any differences.  And anytime you make the small. All this change to a prompt to the agent team, you do all this again, all 20 questions, because the fun thing about AI, again, nothing like traditional software, is that they're an embodied thing, which means changing one thing could very well change its attitude, and a completely different thing which you had no expectation of ever changing.  This is more noticeable in image generation, like, I had the exact same instructions to reach to images, but asked it to stick to a different mood.  And as you can see, it completely wiped out most of the humans off the beach, just because I asked for a more tranquil time.  And there's a lot of different changes that are just assumed by just me changing the mood. This is also true for texts, it's just in the more subtle way, and so it's even harder to catch.  And so that's why for any changes you make, you run that test over and over and over again. It's also important because this way you will find out if you're getting, you know, the worm.  can on Mandalorian, Cold game, like colder, colder, warmer, warmer, like the test will tell you if you're getting warmer to where you want to be or not.  So yeah, provided those two versions, asked it to evaluate against the criteria I gave it. I can actually specify the themes which are most important to me, like how much strategic value this version A versus version B had, how much relevance and context did it have, and what is the response quality.  And I like these percentage breakdowns because it shows to the model how important each one of these is. And I asked it to, like, kind of give a score to each one, so plus two if version B is much better, or version A is much better, minus two if version B is much better, and zero if they're about the same.  This regimented approach makes sure that its conclusions are not just general opinion, that you can actually double check its logic and make sure that it actually aligns with yours, and if it doesn't, you change the evaluation.  next time. Bye. And I, by the way, I do have these evaluation prompts in my back pocket, I'll try to float them on the Notion page, but if not, just ask me, I'll send them your way.  And you do this for every single question, so every single one of the 20 questions, you go one by one, is version A better for that one, version B better for that one, plus two, minus two, plus two, minus two, and then you add them all up.  And then you ask it for, like, a summary in the end, in order to crunch down, like, what its reasoning is.  So, like, here's an example. Like, it's talking about digital engagement while preserving personal connection for church community versus for, like, a church advisor that we built once.  So, it's giving me differences on each question, whether, what is the difference in strategic value or relevance or response quality.  So, like, it says, like, both responses down to demonstrate. clarity and flow. version B's inclusion to specific next steps make it slightly more actionable.  So minus one, version B is a little better. This is one out of 20 questions. It does it for all of them.  This could likewise be used for supervisor prompt that it correctly routed to the right agent, gives you an overall score as to how many of the ones that you offered were correct.  And then after it goes through all 20, it gives a general overview of key issues that it found in either or.  Like, for example, router has a really hard time finding the boundary between these two agents. And then it crunches down all of the score, gives you an average, minus 1.1, so version B is slightly better than version A.  Your modifications did something right. You're on the right track. And then it gives you general advice as to where to move forward from there.  . All of this in a single run, like, this is a single prompt, just copy and paste into version A, version B in there, your questions and responses, gives you all of this rich insight, so you can go a very long way in improving your outputs by just making changes, running tests, pivoting.  So any questions on, like, what this, using LLMs to test AI apps is all about? It's a lot, Lev.

53:36 - JP Elliott
  It is.

53:37 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah.

53:39 - JP Elliott
  It's cool.

53:41 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  It's, you know, it's not like building a rocket. Like, it's not like if you don't do one of these things, you're not going to have an AI app.  You will have an AI app, and you can always just do this all through trial and error. You're, you know, you can just always crack the hood and only look at the user responses.  of answers. and Go from there and just learn through errors. This is just like something.

54:06 - JP Elliott
  This is the eval process, basically.

54:09 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yes. This is the eval. Yeah. Good point. should just, did I mention that in the title? Did I send you that one podcast with, I think I saw it, I think I sent it to you, but it was a podcast with these guys who created evals, and I sent that one to you.  Yeah, yeah. I didn't watch the video, so I didn't need to watch that, but it was interesting.

54:29 - JP Elliott
  But yeah, I see what you're doing here. That was their process of it, but it makes sense. But you have to do evals, otherwise you don't know if the output's actually correct or not.

54:39 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Sometimes we don't. If it's a low risk environment, sometimes we just publish and just see what happens. And that's fine.  And evals, there are Maven courses that are four or five weeks long just on evals. It's a field of its own.  And even what I'm showing you here is just very, very bone dry. This is like elementary school level evals.  If I was a data scientist, there are so many crazy things that they do. It makes my head spin.  But actually, to offer an alternative, there is a much more organic and typical way to do this. Yeah. It's a model.  Get it? Because it's a model. I thought I was cleverer for that. There is this thing called red teaming, which is just using humans.  Before publishing, you just created an entrusted circle of friends and ask them to use the app as intended and intentionally to make it do something awkward or you know, embarrassing.  So this is bad. This is like this is you using the LLM in their stead because using. Humans is expensive and is a favor, really.  But you can always default to this. You'll get some feedback from them, and you literally just tell the model, like, look, I'm building this app.  Here's the back end prompt. Here's the feedback from the users. How do you suggest I modify the prompt to make it better?  Very, very easy, very organic, very much doing what we've been doing as humans for a while. But this is more applicable to stress testing.  So this is not ‑‑ this would be very inefficient if you're using this to inch forward towards your goal, because you have to do this a lot, and if you have humans that dedicated, then good for you.  But this is really, like, you've already made it as good as you can with LEM feedback. Now you want to really test the edge cases, make sure it doesn't disappoint you or embarrass you by the closing ‑‑ by, like, Ed.  Ed. We tend to do this synchronously, actually. tend to just have a Zoom call, here's the link, try the app, this is an intended use case, try to use it how you would want to use it if you were the user, what's your experience, give me feedback.  Now try to make it do something embarrassing, what is your experience, give me feedback. And we do, like, a couple of 10-minute loops of that.  Very productive, lots of new insights. Again, the way to predict, like, most very unexpected use cases that might surface when you publish.

57:39 - JP Elliott
  That's cool. We have a lot of work to do, because I'm not going able to get into this as much.  So we have to go back and watch some of the videos, I think, as well.

57:50 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, or, again, schedule a time with me, and I can just apply it in time. with and real time.  Yeah, The great thing is, You have a functional product at every step of the way. So if you neglect one of your steps, you still have a functional product.

58:05 - JP Elliott
  That's what I love about AI, is like, have, it works no matter what.

58:13 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  And if you do it right, the only skill you're applying is what you learn as a toddler, is to communicate.  Like, if you structure the process right, there's no coding, there's no, like, extra sense, a superpower that you need.  You're just communicating, getting feedback, communicating, getting feedback, using the model as a sounding board in order to shape your backend prompt in the right direction.

58:39 - JP Elliott
  True. True.

58:41 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Okay. So let's say you launched, and you have users using it. And now you want to look, okay, so how are the users using it, and are we using it correctly?  And now you get to do Do more evals, which I know I'm not making it sound fun, it actually is fun, because you get to see all of these wacky applications, and you're just like, you know, it's not like you're building a software, it's more like you're bringing a child into the world, and you're finding all the ways it's finding it to interact with this very ambiguous and open field.  So the simplest method to, first of all, please make sure that all your apps are storing the use cases in CSV file.  There's a lot of like pre-made free applications, like Arise Phoenix, which they just store everything that went in, everything that went out.  Everything that the user said, they store, everything that the model responded, they store. And they're great at like, if it's an agentic team, they earmark, so which agent said what, what is the support.  They draw you nice maps. Anyways, there's a lot of great free tools out there to just collect data, but you've collected it.  Okay, great. Now you have a CSV file. The most cut and dry thing to do is upload this to OpenAI or Gemini or one of the leading models and ask like, hey, what trends do you see?  What outliers do you see? What is the prevalence of these use cases? You're not going to get exact numbers and like, you know, you asked some classifications like, what's an outlier?  On 400 use cases, Gemini said there's 120 outliers. OpenAI said there are five. So various objectives as to what they call an outlier.  But anyway, you're going to find some outliers. So this is like your first very dirty and crude method to kind of like look at the data and see what's there.  One thing it is reliable at is looking for sentiment. So are there any conversations? One those . One which betray a sense of disgruntlement on the side of the user.  That is really good at. It will earmark them all, and you can go through them one by one and be like, okay, so I can see what my app did wrong there.  Themes, you can say, just tell me what themes you see. Again, very different models, even the same model will give you very different answers, but still kind of insightful and interesting.  Like, you're like, okay, so like, I see a big theme in using my Playful Anthropy app in order to find out about the conflict in, I don't know, Sudan or, or wherever.  Beyond that, other methods do exist, and they do use AI. There are just these very specialized AI called BERT, and they're actually predate Gen AI, but what they do is they classify things by themes, and the themes are made up on the way, so they're not.  They're not just like, you know, you don't pre-define the themes. They find the themes in the content itself, and like we had a client discover that they had a huge Spanish-speaking audience that they had no idea about, because they were only using traditional software, and traditional software only came in English, or maybe it had a Spanish option, but they had no idea how much traffic was going through there.  Then they launched an AI app, purely in English, but AI apps are multilingual by default, and suddenly, like a bunch of people are using their app in Spanish.  And through Topic Modeling and Bird, they realized like, oh wow, like a huge percentage of our users are talking in Spanish, and the great majority of them is talking about San or San Diego, and beach hiking, beach travel.  So, here Huge insight into the user, and this is really, like, I know everything I said is extremely overwhelming, this is the deliverable of launching an AI app, is because it's open field and the user can do what they please with the app, you get such a deeper window into their psychology than you would ever could achieve with something static.  They literally write down their desires in text, like it's a free response questionnaire for free, which you would, you know, if you know anything about statistics, it's so painful to force people to write questionnaires that are unreliable, you have a selection bias because only people of older population have the time to answer questionnaires, here you get a complete cut of entire population and they're just giving you free form responses on what they want all day long.  So that is, like, truly the pie in the sky. Like you ‑‑ there's such a rich feedback from the users because you created an AI app.  Monique, I know you just joined. Hopefully that was, like, informative, even though it like, a piece. But anything on evaluations, just anything on evaluations, I just, if you're curious, it doesn't have to be from the lecture, anything at all.

1:04:21 - Monique
  Yeah, I have a bunch of questions, because, like, it's weird. Yeah, totally.

1:04:28 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  JP and Zen, I won't spend too much time on those.

1:04:30 - Monique
  But, like, of course, we developed our two agentic experiences before, like, we did any research or any, like, analysis.

1:04:42 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  And now we're, like, developing an orchestrator, and I'm running, like, this discovery research around, you know, a lot of it.

1:04:51 - Monique
  Anyway, so right now, Lev, so I have customer logs. Like, we have a An agentic search that's super creddy, but anyway, I've got query logs, and I went in and I analyzed them.  At the same time, we have this thing called PlanAI, which is only live on the web, and it's a super crappy meal planning and recipe planning and product finding assistance.  And so we're using Langsmith to evaluate those queries and to evaluate, like, what is correct, and we're able, you know, and I'm just starting to play that.  I'm bringing this up because this. We then have a third system where, okay, so, like, in Langsmith, Langsmith is suggesting, like, topics, like, or is it?  I'm confused. We have so many, we have thematic as well, which is taking our, taking our app reviews, and that is using AI to suggest categorization, right?

1:05:57 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Pretty accurately. Anyway.

1:06:00 - Monique
  We then have this other database where I went in and helped develop a schema to say, here are high-level categories, and we're using AI to basically, like, shove stuff into those categories, and that requires a lot of refinement on our part.  But we're also able to be subject matter experts and say, you know, give it kind of granularity. So I don't know if that's what I'm looking at here, or if this is strictly, like, a quant survey or feedback loop of some sort where folks are saying, here's how I feel about the AI.  Here's what I want from it.

1:06:42 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  This is purely natural language experience. This is from the road tripping, like, planner, like, example of what you see is where, like, people describe a road trip they want.  And there's all these descriptions that are very free-form, paragraph-based, natural language, and you classify them. I don't think, because with anything like, yeah, with anything like meal planner, instead of like letting it kind of define its own themes and buckets, in that use case, it might be a better approach to define the buckets beforehand, which you know exists, and then ask it to classify them into existing classifications.  What this BERT and topic modeling is great for when users are just exploring the open playground, and you have no idea how they're exploring it, and you just want to, you have no pre-composition, you have no schema to understand how they're using it, so you want the schemas to be made from the data itself.  Got it, got it, and what does BERT stand for?

1:07:50 - Monique
  Like, what is that exactly?

1:07:53 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  It's an AI model that predates Gen AI. It was actually just a GitHub repo that just became very ‑‑ like before Genative AI started generating text, it started classifying.  Actually, I don't see anywhere where we break it apart. But all it is is just clustering. It just uses AI to kind of understand the semantics or the meaning behind words and uses that to create organic clusters on the spot as to, like, what it sees happening.  So cluster analysis pretty much, like, or is that different?

1:08:41 - Monique
  Yes.

1:08:42 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  But cluster analysis typically implies you made the clusters. Like, you looked at the data and you're like, I see these clusters.  And then you're like, I'm going to conclude that ‑‑ I'm going to that I'm going to analyze this Data by these clusters.  BERT revolutionized this by being, like, look, we have this thing called AI. You've never heard of it because this was pre-2021.  It can cluster for you. It understands the meaning behind the words and can deduce the clusters from the data itself.  Got it. And, yeah, it's a little involved, again, because older, like, you have to tweak certain toggles to make sure the clusters are, like, granular or not granular enough.  Like, this andropic distance map is actually terrible because you can see it clustered most material into one classification and everything else was just kind of like these tiny outliers.  So there's a way to change kind of level of relatedness so it'll atomize them in the right way. But this is just me telling you, like, what's out there.  anywhere? Okay, Generally, your approach sounds great. For the use case, it's just like, pre-define the schema, use AI to classify them into the schema, use your expertise to really make sure it understands the classification buckets.  I was showing earlier, like, you know, I was testing the supervisor prompt to make sure it is directing the right agent, and I had 20 typical questions.  Now, I was asking another AI to check whether the supervisor classified them right. And you can see it's, like, given what agent it actually chose, what agent it was supposed to choose, and why it thinks that the wrong answer was given.  And 16 out of 20 were correct. So you can do something like this.

1:10:47 - Monique
  is a pretty good score, right? Or not as good as it not?

1:10:53 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  So this is for GIVE. So this is, like, between philanthropy agent and, um, . Specific charity agents. So in this use case, it was okay.  Because if it goes wrong, you know, if you ask about a specific charity, it goes to a philanthropy agent.  Philanthropy's generally know about charities. So it will answer the question. It's not going to say, like, I don't know.  So it wasn't like a deal breaker. Same with the other way. Like, if a general philanthropy question goes to a charity expert, he'll answer it.  He won't answer it as well as a philanthropy one, but it's not going to be a critical break. So in this use case, yes.  But it really depends on the use case. If you have two agents, one's the meal planner, the other one's, I don't know, a road trip planner, and it goes wrong one, that's a critical break.  The model will simply hallucinate. And that's not okay. Right.

1:11:43 - Monique
  Or if it's a medical use case, you don't want 80%, maybe.

1:11:47 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Oh, yeah. Medical, like, I'm surprised it's already making forays into medical. Because, yeah, the error margin is just huge.  But they're not generative as much. Like, they're more like what Burt was doing. Like, a lot of their use cases is, like, atypical cancerous cell clustering.  Something that eyeballs could see, but machines are just way better at just looking for clusters. They're not generating information.  They're looking for continuities. And same with drug, like, drug discovery, right?

1:12:28 - Monique
  They're just looking for patterns, maybe, that the humans can't see, or I don't know.

1:12:33 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Anyway, sorry, I don't know. No, no, it's all good. Real quick, because that is a fascinating subject. No, that is generative.  Because just the way we use words, and there's certain grammar and structure, but at the same time, there's endless creativity in what we can see, just as long as we stick to the grammar rules.  Enzymes operate in the same way. There's a particular grammar to them that makes them interoperable. Functional. But there's an endless open field as to what we can create out of them.  And if it wasn't for AI, would take ‑‑ if we employed all the humans on Earth only as enzyme engineers, it would still take hundreds of years to explore a possibility space.  But now with AI, we can just turn it on and let it do its thing. And so I'm really scared and excited to see what that's going to ‑‑ Oh, my gosh.

1:13:28 - Monique
  Yep. Yep, yep, yep. Scared it.

1:13:30 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  And there's pirate gene labs. Like, you know, there's Netflix and there's Pirate Bay. They have the same thing for genetics, which is really scary.  Oh, my should not exist. Like, you know, there's some bootleg virus engineering AI just somewhere in a developing nation.  Yeah, yeah. Okay, I'm not going to sleep tonight. Anyway. It's going to be Bioshock through and through. I want to close on a note that this is the wild, wild west.  We are in what is called the horseless carriage thinking, which is when they first invented cars, the way they imagined the cars as a cart without a horse, because what else could you imagine, took a long time before the T model came out, and we were like, wait, because we have these new speeds and these new abilities, what we're going to need is a completely new redesign.  We're kind of in the same place with AI, where we're like, oh, if it generates text, let's just create a Word doc that can generate text, and really, that's where we stopped for now, and this is not where our capabilities lie.  Like, there's no Wikipedia for LLMs, which we actually tried to make, as you saw. There's no Figma for image generation, which Figma is actually trying to make now.  There's no Reddit for LLMs, like, there's Reddit posts, but there's no consortium of experts. recently we'll find No singular kind of like, you know, like association of psychology, association of psychiatry, association of anything.  You choose, there's an association for it. There's no national or international association of LLMs, kind of like everyone just doing their own thing.  And there are experimental spaces like Hugging Face, let me see if any of these work, where people are really experimenting in a really fun way with new user interfaces.  Like this is a comic book generator. It like lays you out the boxes. haven't been here in forever, but this doesn't even work.  But you can like choose the era of the comic book and like the grid layout, and then you write the story in natural language.  And then like it'll generate you a comic strip. So really fun. This is purely fan based. Really fun. Let me see what else we have here, use cases, some of them are more arcane, but just if you are looking for ideas, many of these are broken, you can go to hugging face spaces and just click on the topic that you want, and it will pick you of the most popular ones by default, which usually means they work, face swap, interesting, comic book factory, just like fun, ideas to look around and see what people are experimenting with, a great idea to like draw inspiration from.  And last thing I want to say is, let me get back to my lecture, whoops, that's my, that's my background.  What is that? It's Cillian Murphy in a movie about social workers that is so, he's very into indie movies right now, and it just resonated so much with me.  Music . Where is my slide deck? Highly recommend, but completely off topic. So, yeah, the last thing about feedback.  The attitude of people towards rating is anything people a 9 or a 10 is a feeling great. And we actually agree with that.  I'm here to give you a 9 or a 10. We care a lot about this course is a good investment.  Maven is a satisfaction guarantee kind of pledge. We give you a satisfaction guarantee kind of pledge. If you're not ready to give a 9 or a 10, let us know what we can do for you.  We have provided or we'll refund you the money. I would much rather do that than walk away feeling like we did not give you what you wanted.  A little caveat, please do schedule a one‑on‑one before we make a final judgment because, again, what I offered was baseplate.  It is not intended to be comprehensive or applicable. I can only… Personalize it in a personal exchange, so please do reach out and tell me how we can apply this with that.  Thank you so much for joining through this course. And yeah, this is not goodbye. I hope we stay in touch.  I'll remain your consultant on whatever use cases you run into and hope we can build something fun together. Any closing remarks, questions from you all?

1:18:26 - JP Elliott
  Yeah, thank you, I appreciate it. Thank you.

1:18:30 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  We'll talk soon, Lev, all right? Yeah, sounds good. We'll set some time up for you.

1:18:35 - JP Elliott
  Just email me directly, guess, right? Yeah, or a calendar link, which I've sent multiple times, I'll send again. Okay, I'm sure it's better.

1:18:43 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Whichever. Okay.

1:18:45 - JP Elliott
  Got it.

1:18:46 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, that's where the calendar link makes sense.

1:18:48 - JP Elliott
  All right. Thank you, guys. Talk soon. All right.

1:18:52 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Thank you. Bye.

1:18:53 - Monique
  Bye. Bye. Um, Lev, I wanna, like, prior, I mean, I got I have so much work I have to catch up on, but I want to prioritize my personal assets over my work stuff.  So I'm going to try to do that, even though I have so many questions about what's going on at work.  And I have this wonderful coworker who is trying to upscale in AI, and she comes from a UX background.  She just had a baby, and, like, she's questioning everything, you know? So I'm trying hard to separate all this stuff, because everything I learn, I kind of bring back to her as well.

1:19:38 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Oh, cool. Is she on maternity leave, or is she, like, working?

1:19:42 - Monique
  She just got back, and I'm a mom of twins. She had twins.

1:19:48 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  And so her kid is real.

1:19:50 - Monique
  I cannot imagine. Yeah.

1:19:53 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  And her husband works, I think, at Apple.

1:19:56 - Monique
  And so, like, you know, they've been in tech. And And they're just trying to figure out, like, a lot of what I love about what you and Jeremy do and handshake does is, A, it's, like, useful AI, A, it's, like, B, it's, like, mission-driven, and I think it's also entrepreneurial.  And so, like, I'm trying to myself think that way and then help her think that way, right? Like, everything we make at work, we're doing it because we want it on our portfolio, or we're extending it to something we can build and make.  Like, she and I are thinking of making a WAZ, like, app, right, via Figma Make and other things. And so how could we package that?  The point of it being, like, get, and as a researcher, I want all UXers to do AI evaluation. And do WAZ, like, that should be, that should be in your back pocket, because you want, I think we should all be involved in our.  Architecture and model choice, because from the get-go, right, like, perhaps, anyway, I'm just thinking of marketability and entrepreneurial opportunity and stuff like that.

1:21:12 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Like, what's the future going to be like?

1:21:14 - Monique
  It's not going to be designing interfaces, you know?

1:21:17 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, yeah. I know that's a lot.

1:21:21 - Monique
  That's a lot.

1:21:22 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, and the Figma application, because it's kind of, like, it's a little image, it's a little text, that's a big undertaking.  Not impossible. Just not something you build a prototype of in Flowey. So best to cut that apart into pieces and just think of, like, which was part do you want to tackle first as, like, a base rock?  Yeah, and so, like, I didn't want to pop her bubble, but, like, the meeting I just took was with our engineer who built a POC on his local drive, because I think we.  So use that.

1:22:00 - Monique
  It already hooks into ChatGPT with MCP and also Claude. And we could baseline. And I want that real‑time logging to happen because, like, I want to do this with, like, see, here I go, talking not about my project, which I care about more, actually, but I'm just in it.  I'm just in this stuff right now, right? Because ideally, we would do this, like, qualitatively where someone's playing the wizard, but logging is automated.  And with, like, 20 people, test it out. And then I have this idea, like, can't we automate it further and have it go at scale?  We're like ‑‑ because it's a lot of work for that wizard. So how can we create, like, a baseline from those, like, let's say, 20 quals and somehow do it at scale?  Or do we just send it to Langsmith? Wait, wait, wait.

1:22:53 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  LangGraph. Langsmith is the company, right?

1:22:55 - Monique
  Do we just somehow, like, take ‑‑ Take what we learned, use a similar framework for metric collection and success, and implement that in line graph, you know, like evaluation at scale.  I mean, you're not going to have that human in the participants, but I don't know. I'll set up office hours.  I'm sorry, Zen, I don't want to do No, no, no, no.

1:23:20 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  We are in office hours. This is it. Oh.

1:23:24 - Monique
  It's okay.

1:23:25 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah. Zen, if you have any questions, feel free to pop them in right now, too. We'll just ‑‑ And Zen, I will talk forever.

1:23:37 - Monique
  That's okay.

1:23:39 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  As you can see, we have a big ‑‑ You know, kind of like, to pull from disruptive innovation, like, you'd want ‑‑ It's okay to put a lot of work into a small use case at first, because that's what ‑‑ how disruption works.  You will get a lot of universals out of there which will work in the more general use case as well.  Like the system prompt could be ported over. Many of the instructions, you have already seen that they work. And so like when you make a more general application, you know that piece of instructions is working correctly.  Whatever is not working does not have to do with that. So really the smaller use case is a fully functional stepping stone towards a larger one.  And it's just, as I said, it's an endless playground as to what the AI can do. can do everything.  So you want to bite off the smallest piece, work with that, and then slowly expand from there. And it sounds like in this narrow field, you already have a lot of expertise.  So you will have a lot of intuitional guidance as to how to do it. In terms of Lang, LangSmith, LangGraph, LangChain.  Oh, my God. Right? It's the stop of a lame thing.

1:25:05 - Monique
  And I think two of those are two different companies, in fact. Yes. Yes. It's so dumb. It's like how, anyway, don't get me started on how everyone's naming their dumb models.  But yeah, it's the same thing. Like, with all the Google naming in the beginning, where it's like, what are you doing?

1:25:22 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah. Yeah. They're all kind of pretty universal. They're just, like, either a comprehensive eval tool or, like, an agent team-building tool with the eval thing expected to be plugged into it.  That kind of all goes by default. What you do in FlowWise is basically the same thing. You just, you just want to plug in to see, like, what goes into, in and out of each node, and then, like, evaluate them.  Again, what's great is you evaluate all that piecemeal. Does the supervisor route correctly? Does the agent reach the right tool?  Who cares about what it generates? We're not looking at what it generates right now. Does it reach to the right information?  Okay, so we got that down. Now let's see if it's generating the right content because we know if it's generating right or wrong.  It's not because of the information. It's because of the generation. So really, like, task decomposition and Wizard of Oz as much as you can with the smallest piece you can.  And it's just also more psychologically satisfactory than, like, taking on a giant Goliath and being overwhelmed by it. Like, you get immediate returns.  You have something to show. You get something to get buy-in from other investors. So to think back, your particular use case was to build a Wizard of Oz decomposer for others, right?

1:26:49 - Monique
  Yeah. Um, I mean, like, it's so dumb. We've built, like, these two search, um, we call it Ask Gay.  Okay. I search. It's so dumb. No one knows the difference between that and search. And then there's Plan AI, which is helping folks, you know, plan out.  What's really painful is to say, like, I have five. I'm a family of five. All meals need to be high protein, high veg, high fruit, and kid-friendly.  Don't include pineapples. They only eat carrots and broccoli and keep me in this budget, right? That's how people think, right?  And so they're given this, like, meal planner that can't do that because we launched it and it's not ready.  But that's how they think. And so how do we decompose that? And that's actually a fun thing that I'm working on right now because, you know, the principal product owner told me, he built it basically himself.  And he was, he told me, like, and he told me that his, he wants my help in getting, you can't be.  Build a list, right? You just can't. And that's what people want. Like, I just want a cart that suits that scenario and has the lowest price options in my cart.  That's all I want from my meal system, but it's everything.

1:28:12 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  And you can't do it right now.

1:28:14 - Monique
  And so I just went through the flow for him and I loomed it because I want to ensure that I understand as he's understanding the pain of that.  And already, it's just, like, we need to do so much task composition. And it's exciting and it's fun, right?  And so, like, that's another thing. But this whole Waz is, like, he's not even as interested in that because it's another initiative where, for whatever reasons, we're designing this orchestrator slash meal assistant that's going to sit on top.  And then it's going to send whatever to the plan AI, to the ask AI. Which is search, to the cart AI, to all the AIs, all the agents that everybody wants to build because everyone wants to build an agent.

1:29:09 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Of their own.

1:29:10 - Monique
  What was that? Of their own.

1:29:13 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Like, it's all just.

1:29:15 - Monique
  Because it's a  contest. And because it's political. It's terrible.

1:29:21 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  It's terrible.

1:29:22 - Monique
  I'm not going to be here for long. But I'm learning so much and it's fun. But anyway, where was I going with that?  To your point, some, it should just be, dude, send it to the calculator. Send it to, you know, send it to the inventory database.  Send it to whatevs. Like, so that's the point of the was. Is we just want to say, look, if we just tackle these seven use cases, these two are prompt only.  These three need to be rag, right?

1:29:54 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Mm-hmm. Maybe these two, you're going to have to fine tune.

1:29:57 - Monique
  So it's like, if we could just come with that. And even, like, we could just do 20 of them, and then maybe we could use traditional AI and ML, because we have a team, and they can do, like, they can make predictions based on this, right?  Like, maybe they could scale it out for us, if that makes sense.

1:30:19 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Scale it out. Scale out the app? Well, I don't know.

1:30:24 - Monique
  What I was thinking is, you know, you can't make percentages off of 20, 20 WASTE, like, sessions, right? You could, those are strong signals, but could I hand that over, all the analysis, and all the, you know, all the analysis, could I give it to my data team, my data scientists, and say, take this, use your other sources of data, use your models, and project, based on what I found, can you guys make any comments?  Confident projections on, you know, how this might scale. Is it accurate? Can you somehow model a sample of, I don't know, 20,000 queries or whatever it would be?  I don't know. Am I off base? I'm just like riffing here.

1:31:19 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  I mean, you could just, you'll create something rugged that is, you know, a mile away from seeing the public, but it would be a good starting spot.  In terms of the 20 use cases, I think that the idea of, like, what needs rag, what needs prompt, that's a great first step.  Because from there, you can at least do some of the coordinate plan of, like, how useful this would and how much work it needs.  And just this plot X is, like, utility, Y is work. So then you'd want to pick the furthest bottom right.  That's what we actually do with clients who have, like, many ideas about AI but don't know which to settle for.  That would be a great first step. Yeah, just have the analytics team kind of, like, give a score on the utility, have the developer team give a score on the difficulty, plot them all together, then the choice would become obvious.  So that would be a good first step. In terms of, like, just plugging things in, again, you saw we spent two weeks before plugging any data in.  There's a reason for that, because, like, without the backdrop, it's going to be very underwhelming and it'll be really hard to figure out what is wrong.  So, a great thing about, no matter what your use case is, the system prompt is going to be more or less the same.  You are company X, you are serving as target audience, you have this principles and how you work. So, like, well.  reconstruction. agree. So, Starting with that is kind of like a ‑‑ there's no waste of work there. At the very least, no matter what you make, slap that system prompt in, it has a backdrop.  It is working that much better. You're about much better to the end goal.

1:33:16 - Monique
  And can I just share ‑‑ okay, so the system prompt, like, if I could find it, it's 25 pages long.  And I don't know if that's, like, normal. This is the guy ‑‑ this is just for our meal plan assistant.  And, you know, this is the mad scientist principal product owner that's doing this all on his own. But also, he was, like, we can't rely on system prompts because it's way expensive.  And so we're going to have to create an agent that sells for Converse, for LUX and all this stuff that we were talking about.  But I got to pull this up, Lev, because I just want to show it to you, if you don't mind.

1:33:54 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Is that okay? Yeah, please.

1:33:55 - Monique
  Like, I'm curious for your feedback on it, but ‑‑ I, I'm not good at keeping track of all my stuff, so give me a sec.  Um, where would it be?

1:34:09 - Zen Galvan
  Oh, okay. Um, please excuse me. I have to go, because I need to be early tomorrow, but thank you so much, Lev.  Thank you.

1:34:17 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, I'll try to schedule a one‑on‑one call with you soon.

1:34:20 - Monique
  It's been just a tactic for us, and we're focusing on that kind For everyone, yeah.

1:34:25 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah.

1:34:26 - Zen Galvan
  Absolutely. I'm looking forward to the call.

1:34:28 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah. Sounds good. Very interesting ideas.

1:34:31 - Zen Galvan
  I'm actually a registered Magicianist Edition in the Philippines, and I'm excited, um, about what you're going to build.

1:34:39 - Monique
  Zen, it's so nice to meet you. I have Mexipinos. I know that sounds awful, but my kids are half Philippine, and, um, your grandma and grandpa live with us half the time, and then, uh, my mother‑in‑law is going back to, uh, the Philippines on Saturday.  Oh, that's cool. And she lives in Laguna. Do you know where that is? Oh, yeah, I know.

1:34:59 - Zen Galvan
  I'm ‑‑ Close to Laguna.

1:35:02 - Monique
  Yeah, we so need to get over there. It's just such a long flight, and my kids are a pain on long flights, but yeah, like, that's wonderful.

1:35:12 - Zen Galvan
  Where do you live? In Silang, Cavite, but it's like a neighbor, Laguna, and Cavite is like a neighbor. I'm really close to Laguna, that's why.

1:35:22 - Monique
  That's wonderful. So you're close to the ocean, right? I think. really.

1:35:27 - Zen Galvan
  The volcano, I guess. That's not bad.

1:35:30 - Monique
  That's amazing. Oh, my gosh.

1:35:34 - Zen Galvan
  Okay, well, I don't want to keep you, so let's. But thank you. Yeah, thank you.

1:35:38 - Monique
  Well, let's reach out on LinkedIn, yeah? Yeah, of course.

1:35:42 - Zen Galvan
  Okay, thank you. Bye-bye.

1:35:44 - Monique
  Bye.

1:35:44 - Zen Galvan
  Bye.

1:35:45 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Thank you.

1:35:46 - Zen Galvan
  I don't know, Lev.

1:35:47 - Monique
  I can't find it. I gotta find Oh, you can't find it.

1:35:50 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  I was looking forward to seeing a 25-page.

1:35:52 - Monique
  Dude. It's a problem.

1:35:54 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  It's like, what? He did something very right, but also kind of like... you. Kind of overshot.

1:36:02 - Monique
  Right? Oh, my God. And that's kind of, I feel for this guy, because, like, he's just, you know, in the trenches.  But also, sometimes I'm like, I don't know. I don't know. I need to take a break. I think I'm just doing 85 things, too much coffee.

1:36:20 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  But I'll find it, and I'll try to pop us out. Yeah, yeah, send it my way. I mean, I'm about to send an NDA or whatever.  It's, you know, I was just wondering, like, if you type in, put that system prompt in, say this is a system prompt, ask Claude, like, how much redundancy do you see, how much can you put us down without losing functionality?  You're right. You're right.

1:36:45 - Monique
  You're right. That's, because I know I've built those kinds of things, and I'm just, like, in the rabbit hole, and.

1:36:51 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah. And he probably built it in ChatGPT or Claude, anyway. Yeah, that's why so. So, it's... Like, would you like me to do these 85 things that you probably don't need, but you're on a roll, and you're like, sure, do it, because I probably didn't think that.  Yeah, Jeremy just did a lecture where he was like, we need to change our perspective as project managers, because now the labor is not in writing, the labor is in reading.  Because before, asking somebody to read something was a no-brainer. It's like, hey, can you read something for me? Sure.  Can you write something for me? Oh, that's a big deal. Like, you're not going to just passively ask somebody to write something at work, because that's half a day of work.  Now it's completely the other way around. Ask me to write something, sure, I'll do it in five seconds. Ask me to read something that's an actual favor you're asking me.  I'm not just going to, like, on a whim read something for you, because I know you probably wrote in ChatGPT.  And now I'm a filtering question, a filtering function. I'm doing, like, real work. Reading is real work now. You're so right.

1:37:59 - Monique
  And, like, I I default oftentimes to not reading through all of this stuff because it's so much, right? And I'm just trying to wrap my head, like, because a lot of what I use Gen AI for is teach, explain it to me, teach me, or here's what I'm thinking.  Like, I always try, if I'm not learning, to put something together so I don't outsource my thinking as much as easy as it is to, right?  And so I'll put something together, then I give it to it, and it's got my system prompt where, you know, I tell it exactly what I want, and it pokes holes, it amends it, right?  Anyway, yeah, I got to call myself out on that because sometimes I don't want to read all of the  it comes to.

1:38:48 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah, no, this is absolutely inundating. And yeah, that 25-page system prompt, if you wrote it all by hand, I commend that, and that's a lot of work, and it'll be a very powerful app.  Let's this. Thank It'll cost you five bucks every time you run it, but hey, for a starting point, that's awesome.  That's a great starting point. Because all the information is there.

1:39:10 - Monique
  I stopped at page 12, because I was just like, do you know what I mean? So, like, I really need to, and I have it on my to-do list, Analyze That Sucker, that it's, like, you know, anyway, I'm putting up Fathom.

1:39:21 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Is it sectioned out, or is it just free, free form Fathom?

1:39:25 - Monique
  Kind of sectioned out, like, it has headings, and, you know, but kind of not. I mean, I can tell it was plug and play from an AI, but he tried, like, in the beginning, for sure.  It's just, like, he just kept going. Yeah. And it's this whole slop thing, right, where we're just, like, quantity matters for some reason?  Because, I don't know.

1:39:50 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Well, free form thinking for AI does matter. Like, I get better responses on prompts where I'm. It'll cost you five bucks every time you run it, but hey, for a starting point, that's awesome.  That's a great starting point. Because all the information is there. I stopped at page 12, because I was just like, do you know what I mean?  So, like, I really need to, and I have it on my to-do list, Analyze That Sucker, that it's, like, you know, anyway, I'm putting up Fathom.  Is it sectioned out, or is it just free, free form Fathom? Kind of sectioned out, like, it has headings, and, you know, but kind of not.  I mean, I can tell it was plug and play from an AI, but he tried, like, in the beginning, for sure.

1:40:39 - Monique
  It's just, like, he just kept going. Yeah. And it's this whole slop thing, right, where we're just, like, quantity matters for some reason?  Because, I don't know.

1:40:50 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Well, free form thinking for AI does matter.

1:40:55 - Monique
  Like, I get better responses on prompts where I'm.

1:41:00 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Talking on the phone, and I'm just writing, and writing, and I'm reiterating things, and it's just completely free thought.

1:41:06 - Monique
  I get better response from those instructions than the ones where I polish every sentence and get it very concise and compact.  Because, again, just reading between the lines is getting to my subconscious. It's blueprinting my psychology. And I can always go back and be like, look, I just, I wrote this, you know, while being distracted.

1:41:23 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Can you make this, can you catch the spirit but be more concise? Nice. It's always easier to filter down rather than filter up.  So, yeah, actually, if it's human generated, that's quality. That's gold. Yeah. I mean, I think I'm following you about the phone.  I mean, that's just how I think in general. So when I'm prompting with Claude, like, I call Claude peaches because I kind of have come to love Claude, which is weird.  Weird, but it makes me really uncomfortable because I'm like, am I going to marry the chap up next?

1:42:00 - Monique
  You because I know people do that, and that's really weird, but, yeah, like, sometimes I feel like we're building something together, and it's freaking great and beautiful, because I do feel like Claude's getting it, and amending, and, but I gotta be careful of that, you know what I mean?  Because nobody will go there with me when it comes to just, like, being creative. Does that make sense? Like, it's so fruitful.  It's very, no, it does think in a very cookie-cutter way. It's, it has a particular logic in a way of thinking, a way of writing.

1:42:34 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  So, like, you are making your thinking generic if you're relying on Claude, which, again, which is why, like, this free-form creativity into Claude is the best way, because that way you convey this, like, creative spirit that is uniquely yours onto the model, and that's the most powerful relationship.  Where you, like, where you, one sentence and get a paragraph back, that's the most un... ... And I can tell when people do that, and I'm just like, I'm not even looking at that, like, it annoys me from the word go.

1:43:09 - Monique
  Yeah, yeah, because this is where there is value in AI, is a part of me feels like, I don't know, like I said, there are very few people, aside from my twin, who can really go there with me when I'm being creative or whatevs, and, like, Claude has done that, because I do a lot of it up front.  And then I think it has started to get, like, my tone, and blah, and blah, and blah, but I got to be careful of that, too.

1:43:37 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  I don't know.

1:43:38 - Monique
  This has direct application to your meal planner, where it's like, if you, if you just say, like, fill my cart with carbs, and get a full cart, that ratio is off of input to output, and that's going to be low quality.

1:43:54 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  You want them to say, ask them many questions, want them to say as much as it's going to give back.  That's a quality response.

1:44:01 - Monique
  That ratio has to be somewhere close to one-to-one. That is such a freaking good point. Yes. And the problem, too, especially in this artificial research environment, people are just like, they don't want to give that, right?  But then also the context of who has a half hour to buy groceries. If you're like my husband, it's like five minutes, right?  But he systematized it, because that's who he is. Whereas me, I'm experiential, and I'll explore, and it will be a 45-minute process, and then I'm late for a meeting.  But I got what I really wanted. Do you know what mean? I'm sure your output is more quality than your husband's as a result.  Yeah. I mean, but, you know. You've got so much more attention. Yeah, yeah. But he's just like that, you know?

1:44:54 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah. So it's so freaking interesting.

1:44:56 - Monique
  Yeah, really hard to create a single meal planner. For both these personalities.

1:45:02 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Yeah. I mean, you can use the pills, right?

1:45:05 - Monique
  Like, for those systematic thinkers, just have a buy it again pill or, you know, or, or like, you know, I don't know, build my cart or whatever it is.

1:45:15 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  And then, but then I'm going to always give a scenario or like all the data. Like, ideally, I would onboard and give all that info away, family of five, these are the dietary restrictions, this is this, this is that.  So you know me, right? But we don't yet. And so I just give all that in the beginning. And, but I'm breaking it already.  I can tell. Like, it can't take a scenario. It's got to be like what you were talking about, those nodes, like the, the linear work stream.  Does A work? Does B? Does C? Does, and, and we've probably only done that for like two or three, right?  And that's where we're at. Forget it. Yeah, it's a lot of work in itself. So I can see why.  Yeah.

1:45:57 - Monique
  Okay. I'm going to let you go. I could talk about this for. Yeah, really enjoyed it.

1:46:02 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Oh, my God.

1:46:03 - Monique
  This was such a fun class. Because it's the systems design.

1:46:07 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  It's, like, it's that stuff that I really love, right? Like, I don't know. Yeah, no, this is an opportunity to shine for the systems design.  Because I'm very system, you know, you see, I love systems. I've been meaning to ask, what is that? I love that it's, like, handmade, too.  Yeah, it spans an entire room. And I have a suitcase worth and spans an entire house. It's been doing it for over a decade.

1:46:33 - Monique
  It's tracking continuities in ideology. And it's kind of like a philosophy of ideology, continuation of kind of postmodernist ideological thinking.  And so I love systematizing things. That's why when AI came around, I'm like, this is my jam. I can do this.

1:46:54 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  my God.

1:46:55 - Monique
  How often do you reference it?

1:46:57 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Like, do you just, like, go back to little... And just, like, or is it more just, like, the late, the end of the thread is where you're at, kind of?  I mean, this one, this one's finally more systematized. You can see it goes all the way to the end of the room.

1:47:13 - Monique
  This is one book chapter. So, like, I have a suitcase of journals, which I've set in all kinds of things, out of order.

1:47:24 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  So now I'm rewriting the thoughts that I had in sticky notes and organizing them in the way that they would actually be presented in a book, in a logical fashion.

1:47:32 - Monique
  So that's what this is. And you know what I love about that? Because I try to do that digitally, and it never works.  No. That's why I like fig jams, because I essentially try to do that, but there's, it just, it doesn't work.  You can't do it. You need something like that to, I don't know, at least for me. Because, I don't know, pieces are lost.  you had a computer screen of this size, you could do it. But the thing is, like, your consciousness... Zooms in and out all the time.  It thinks it's bit sticky, and then it's like, okay, where's the big picture?

1:48:05 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Okay, now I want look here. You can't do that on a tablet, even though you can do a finger thing.

1:48:08 - Monique
  It's just not the same.

1:48:10 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  That is so true. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It also reminds me of, like, my son, when he was, like, three and four.  He essentially would take tape all throughout the house and connect things. Whoa. What a beautiful line. Oh, gosh, Lev, he is.  All three of my kids are so freaking different. But he's the most, like, his dad.

1:48:33 - Monique
  But, like, so I would just come out trying to, like, go get dinner or whatever.

1:48:38 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  And I'm like, oh, my gosh, there's, like, this maze.

1:48:41 - Monique
  But it would just, and it made sense to him. And I don't even know what he was connecting, but it went, like, from the kitchen down the hall to his bedroom.

1:48:51 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  And it was either string or tape. then he would do it with me and his sister. He has a twin sister.  And it was about, like, he's a... He wanted us to be connected to him. You know what I mean?  Wow. How old are your kids? Two and a half and ten.

1:49:11 - Monique
  Well, ten is stepkids, so I only get one into his life of eight. So I kind of started the journey midway, and now I'm starting from the beginning.  That must be fascinating. Yeah, it is. And they're also very different. So I'm yet to see, have a kid at Ford.  So it's really interesting to hear that.

1:49:32 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  You have so much ahead of you, and I feel like the stage you're at is like the yummiest stage.  Really? Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.

1:49:41 - Monique
  And, you know, if you can, I'd keep them off of media as much as you can. Oh, yeah. No, this is where me and my wife are very eye to eye.  They get, you know, maybe ten minutes of screen in total. Yeah. Yeah. And it's kind of like very organic.  It's just... Yeah. Thankfully, we agree on that.

1:50:03 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  So, yeah, very much stay off media. Only, like, if he's getting, like, you know, an injection or we distract them.  Oh, for sure. For sure. I mean, sometimes, yeah. And, like, I mean, I kept all my kids off, and then my son went away to Boston when he was 12 and lived there for, like, a year and a half.

1:50:22 - Monique
  And I freaking lost him, you know, because he needed a phone. And it was for a soccer academy. They didn't care.  And he was living there. They just wanted him to play soccer seven hours a day. So, like, no school, really.  Yeah. luckily, he came back at, was it 13 and a half or 14? Biggest sacrifice ever made. But I had to, like, I don't know if I'll ever get him back.  You know what I mean? Like, he's kind of on the phone. It's really hard. So, it is what it

1:51:00 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  Wait, sorry, one sec.

1:51:01 - Monique
  My audio cut out. Where is my audio?

1:51:05 - Lev Gorelov (handshake.fyi)
  There you go.

1:51:06 - Monique
  It should work now. Say something? Hmm? Oh, there you go. Cool. My head won't die on me. Yeah. But yeah, I know.  That is also very scary. Like, whenever, as soon as you, like, look away for a second, they're just, like, that screen addiction is just, like, right there.  Oh, it's real. then also once, I mean, socialization, like, I make all my kids take one day off of media.  Like, just no media. It's, like, just reset. But, like, that's how my 10‑year‑old engages with his friends, you know?  Yeah. Sales, yeah. He's not on social media, but they play video games online. They, they, because his friends don't live in the neighborhood.  So, they're doing that. Or they're just FaceTiming or whatever. So, it's hard, you know? Yeah. It's a hard choice.  Yeah. Yeah, yeah, so, okay, Lev, all right, well, I'll schedule time as a follow-up, and I've got a lot of coursework to do, so, but I'm super excited to start building the app, and thanks for the system prompt, I'm going to get back to your notes, I saw you do notes, oh my god, and it was so deep, there was stuff I wouldn't even have thought about, like, oh, yeah, yeah, so, okay, all right, all right, take care, okay, bye.
